© 2023 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow
Aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease: Preferred practice pattern guidelines on 
clinical approach, diagnosis, and management
Pragnya R Donthineni*, Mariya B Doctor*, Swapna Shanbhag, Anahita Kate1
, Anat Galor2,3, Ali R Djalilian4
, 
Swati Singh5
, Sayan Basu
Access this article online
Website:
www.ijo.in
DOI:
10.4103/IJO.IJO_2808_22
Quick Response Code:
Dry eye disease (DED) is a broad term that includes a diverse group of clinical disorders. Aqueous‑deficient 
dry eye (ADDE), a subtype of DED, is characterized by decreased tear production by the lacrimal gland. It 
can be seen in up to one‑third of individuals with DED and can be comorbid with a systemic autoimmune 
process or occur secondary to an environmental insult. Since ADDE can be a source of long‑term suffering 
and severe visual impairment, early identification and adequate treatment are imperative. Multiple etiologies 
can underlie ADDE, and it is critical to identify the underlying cause to not only improve the ocular health 
but also to improve the overall quality of life and well‑being of affected individuals. This review discusses 
the various etiologies of ADDE, highlights a pathophysiology‑based approach for evaluating underlying 
contributors, outlines various diagnostic tests, and reviews treatment options. We present the current 
standards and discuss ongoing research in this field. Through this review, we propose a treatment algorithm 
that would be useful for an ophthalmologist in diagnosing and managing individuals with ADDE.
Key words: ADDE, aqueous deficiency dry eye disease, DED, dry eye disease, lacrimal gland, Sjögren’s 
syndrome
The Cornea Institute, 5
Ophthalmic Plastic Surgery Services, KAR 
Campus, L V Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, Telangana, India, 1
The 
Cornea Institute, KVC Campus, L V Prasad Eye Institute, Vijaywada, 
Andhra Pradesh, India, 2
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA, 3
Surgical Services, 
Miami Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Miami, FL, USA, 4
Department 
of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Illinois Eye and Ear Infirmary, 
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
*Co‑first authors, have contributed equally to the manuscript.
Correspondence to: Dr. Sayan Basu, MBBS, MS, Director and Prof. 
D Balasubramanian Chair of Eye Research, Prof. Brien Holden Eye 
Research Centre (BHERC), LV Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India. E‑mail: sayanbasu@lvpei.org
Dr. Swati Singh, Ophthalmic Plastic Surgery Services, Ophthalmic 
Plastic Services, KAR Campus, L V Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India. E‑mail: swatisingh@lvpei.org
Received: 25‑Oct‑2022 Revision: 17‑Dec‑2022
Accepted: 16‑Jan‑2023 Published: 05‑Apr‑2023
Dry eye disease (DED) is an umbrella term that includes 
multiple clinical subtypes, and the symptoms of DED affect 
millions of people worldwide.[1,2] The overall premise of 
DED is that tear film instability and hyperosmolarity lead 
to ocular surface inflammation, damage, and neurosensory 
abnormalities causing varied grades of symptoms. The 
prevalence of DED can vary widely (5%–50%) based on the 
disease definition and the population studied.[2] Of particular 
relevance to India, it is estimated that 60% of the Indian urban 
population will be affected by DED symptoms by the year 
2030.[1] DED produces an economic burden due to long‑term 
medical expenses and lost productivity and a social burden 
due to disturbance in the visual, physical, and psychological 
aspects, eventually creating a negative impact on quality 
of life.[2,3] In 2007, the first Tear Film and Ocular Surface 
Society Dry Eye workshop (TFOS‑DEWS) classified DED into 
evaporative (EDE) and aqueous‑deficient (ADDE) subtypes. 
However, clinically, there may be an overlap between the two. 
Therefore, the second Tear Film and Ocular Surface Society 
Dry Eye workshop (TFOS‑DEWS II) classified DED into three 
categories: predominant ADDE, EDE, and a mixed form.[4]
The aqueous component of tears is contributed by main and 
accessory lacrimal glands. ADDE encompasses conditions 
where lacrimal gland output is primarily affected rather than 
Meibomian gland function. Although the natural history of 
the disease varies between individuals and can be impacted by 
underlying comorbidities, in individuals with primary lacrimal 
gland dysfunction, characteristics of EDE often occur with 
progression of disease. Clinically, there is a need to identify 
when ADDE is a component of DED as various etiologies can 
underlie lacrimal gland dysfunction that impacts diagnosis 
and management. The subtle clinical signs in the initial stages 
of ADDE may be overlooked, which if not identified in time, 
can cause chronic irreversible lacrimal gland damage in some 
cases. This review summarizes the different etiologies of 
ADDE, clinical and laboratory tests for diagnosing ADDE, and 
treatment algorithms based on literature and authors’ preferred 
practice pattern.
Causes of ADDE
ADDE due to lacrimal gland insufficiency can present in 
up to a third of all cases diagnosed with DED in India.[1]
Cite this article as: Donthineni PR, Doctor MB, Shanbhag S, Kate A, Galor A, 
Djalilian AR, et al. Aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease: Preferred practice 
pattern guidelines on clinical approach, diagnosis, and management. Indian 
J Ophthalmol 2023;71:1332-47.
This is an open access journal, and articles are distributed under the terms of 
the Creative Commons Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 4.0 License, 
which allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially, 
as long as appropriate credit is given and the new creations are licensed under 
the identical terms.
For reprints contact: WKHLRPMedknow_reprints@wolterskluwer.com
Preferred Practice
April 2023 1333 Donthineni, et al.: Practice patterns of aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease
disease (GVHD). SS is a chronic systemic autoimmune disorder 
causing oral and ocular dryness due to the lymphocytic 
infiltration of salivary and lacrimal glands. It is classically 
defined as primary without any associated autoimmune 
disease and secondary with an underlying autoimmune 
disease such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) or systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE). It predominantly affects middle‑aged 
women and is commonly seen as a triad of dry mouth, dry 
eyes, and dry skin. Patients may also complain of dryness of 
the skin. For the classification and diagnosis, various criteria 
have been developed,[5‑7] the most recent being the American 
College of Rheumatology and the European League Against 
Rheumatism (EULAR) 2016 [Fig. 3].[7] It has the advantage 
of evaluating DED by having two different scoring systems 
depending on the different dyes used for ocular surface 
In this section, the authors classify the different etiologies 
based on pathomechanisms of lacrimal gland damage, 
which include direct immune‑mediated damage to the 
lacrimal gland, lacrimal gland insufficiency secondary to 
conjunctival cicatrization, neurogenic causes, and absence 
or loss of the lacrimal gland. Though conventionally, 
ADDE has been divided into Sjögren’s and non‑Sjögren’s 
subtypes [Fig. 1], we believe the classification outlined 
below aids the clinician in arriving at a correct diagnosis 
and individualizing treatment based on the underlying 
etiology [Fig. 2].
Immune‑mediated lacrimal gland inflammation
Immune‑mediated primary lacrimal gland damage 
occurs in Sjögren’s syndrome (SS) and graft‑versus‑host 
Figure 1: Conventional etiological classification of ADDE differentiating Sjögren’s syndrome, which is the major etiology, from other causes. 
ADDE = aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease, RA = rheumatoid arthritis, SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus
Figure 2: Proposed pathophysiology‑based classification of ADDE. ADDE = aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease
1334 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
staining (rose bengal, fluorescein, lissamine green). The 
pathogenesis of SS is multifactorial. Genetic susceptibility or 
viral infections are thought to cause dysregulation in both 
the innate and acquired immune systems (overactivation of 
B cells, increase in interferons, a role for Th1 and Th17 cells, 
and increase in the proinflammatory cytokines such as matrix 
metalloproteinases).[8,9]
GVHD is the most common adverse event following 
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), 
m e d i a t e d b y i m m u n e d y s r e g u l a t i o n a n d t i s s u e 
inflammation.[10,11] It occurs in about 30%–70% of the 
patients undergoing HSCT and usually within the first year 
following transplantation. Ocular involvement (oGVHD) 
is seen in 40%–60% of patients with GVHD, with a T‑cell–
mediated immune response that affects the lacrimal glands 
and conjunctiva.[10,11] Although the main cause of ADDE in 
GVHD is lymphocytic infiltration of the accessory and major 
lacrimal glands, there can also be a decrease in the density of 
conjunctival goblet cells as well as Meibomian gland atrophy. 
The International Chronic oGVHD (ICCGVHD) consensus 
group diagnostic criteria [Fig. 4] can be used for diagnosis, 
which is based on the Ocular Surface Disease Index (OSDI) 
score, Schirmer’s test, corneal staining, conjunctival injection, 
and presence of systemic GVHD.[12]
Conjunctival cicatrization
Cicatrizing conjunctivitis is a chronic disorder with a common 
clinical presentation of conjunctival scarring. Some causes 
of cicatrizing conjunctivitis are nonprogressive, such as 
Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS), ocular chemical burns, and 
post‑viral conjunctivitis, while others are progressive, such 
as mucus membrane pemphigoid (MMP) and drug‑induced 
cicatrizing conjunctivitis (DICC).[13] The clinical features vary 
from subtle subconjunctival fibrosis to gross ankyloblepharon. 
The inflicting agent can be a local or systemic factor, causing 
nonprogressive or progressive cicatrization. It is important 
to identify the underlying cause since treatment varies 
accordingly.[13] Herein, we briefly discuss the common ones 
seen in our Indian population.
SJS is an acute, potentially fatal, mucocutaneous 
blistering disease, which can be triggered by drugs or viral 
infections.[14,15] The acute phase is life‑threatening, wherein 
widespread denudation of skin and mucosa occurs as a 
result of a dysregulated immune response, mainly a T‑cell–
mediated, type IV hypersensitivity reaction.[16] In addition, 
neutrophils deposit in the conjunctiva, leading to persistent 
inflammation and ocular surface damage.[17] Bilateral 
conjunctivitis commonly goes unnoticed during the acute 
phase and later develops into cicatricial conjunctivitis.[13,18]
ADDE in individuals with SJS occurs due to the periductular 
fibrosis and obstruction of the ductules secondary to 
subconjunctival fibrosis observed in superotemporal fornix. 
The palpebral and orbital lobes of the lacrimal glands can have 
different grades of involvement ranging from distended to 
apoptotic acini, reduced secretory activity, and ultrastructural 
changes in myoepithelial cells.[19]
MMP is a group of systemic autoimmune blistering 
diseases that cause chronic bilateral conjunctivitis leading to 
cicatrization. One subtype that presents predominantly with 
conjunctival involvement is ocular cicatricial pemphigoid 
(OCP or ocular MMP). It predominantly affects middle‑aged 
women, manifesting as subtle conjunctival hyperemia and 
DED in the early phase, which if left untreated, can lead 
to conjunctival scarring, symblepharon, limbal stem cell 
deficiency, severe ADDE, and blinding keratopathy. The 
diagnosis of MMP is usually missed in the early phase due 
to nonspecific symptoms and signs. DICC is a condition 
Figure 3: American College of Rheumatology–European League Against Rheumatism criteria for diagnosing Sjögren’s syndrome[7]
April 2023 1335 Donthineni, et al.: Practice patterns of aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease
clinically similar to MMP (pseudo‑pemphigoid), where 
ocular surface cicatrization occurs as a reaction to the use of 
topical medications, commonly antiglaucoma medications, 
or rarely, some systemic drugs.[20] The cicatrizing changes 
in DICC usually stop progressing once the inciting agent is 
withdrawn; however, the changes are irreversible. Also, an 
associated MMP must be excluded, since it can concurrently 
be present, in which case, long‑term immunosuppression 
is needed.[20] It is assumed that ADDE in MMP and DICC 
also occurs due to periductular fibrosis around the lacrimal 
gland, similar to SJS.
Neurogenic
As the human lacrimal gland is densely innervated with 
sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers, involvement of 
any component of the neural arc can result in ADDE. The 
possible etiologies in this category can be neurotrophic 
keratitis (NK), upper motor facial nerve palsy, diabetes 
mellitus (with or without associated NK), hypothyroidism, 
and rarely, hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy.[21‑23]
Decreased innervation of the cornea results in NK, which 
can occur due to a list of reasons, the most common being 
herpetic infection.[21] Normal corneal innervation is important 
since it initiates the blink reflex, has a role in maintaining 
the tear secretion pathway, and provides the neurotrophic 
factors necessary for epithelial cell homeostasis. Loss of 
corneal innervation causes altered epithelial healing, leading 
to persistent epithelial erosions (Grade 1 NK), defects 
(Grade 2 NK), or ulcers (Grade 3 NK).[21] Patients usually have 
no complaints until the advanced stage, when the vision is 
impaired. In addition to an NK component, ADDE can also 
be seen as comorbid with neuropathic pain,[24] in which nerves 
spontaneously fire, or fire inappropriately to environmental 
stimuli, producing symptoms such as burning and evoked 
pain to wind and light.
Alacrimia
Alacrimia can be congenital or acquired. Congenital 
alacrimia is a rare cause of pediatric ADDE with the absence 
of tear production from birth. It occurs due to abnormal/
absent gland or ductal tissue.[25] It can present with absent/
hyposecretion of tears, severe multisystemic involvement, or 
developmental delay. Ectodermal dysplasia (ED) is a group 
of congenital disorders which involves an abnormality in 
the development of one of the ectodermal derivatives such 
as hair, teeth, nail, and sweat glands. The anomalies in ED 
usually affect multiple organs and systems, hence requiring 
a multidisciplinary approach. Clinical manifestation 
includes scanty eyebrows and eyelashes and ichthyosis, 
with ocular surface features like keratitis, ectropion, 
lacrimal duct obstruction, blepharitis, absence of meibomian 
glands, limbal stem cell deficiency, and severe DED. Early 
recognition and treatment in pediatric age helps prevent 
the long‑term blinding keratopathy in these patients.[25,26]
Further, the parasympathetic autonomic systemic needs to 
be evaluated to confirm the diagnosis.[27] Acquired alacrimia 
can occur post‑radiation therapy and after the surgical 
removal of lacrimal gland tumors.
Diagnosing ADDE in Clinics
The diagnosis of ADDE can be ascertained through a 
combination of clues obtained from the history and clinical 
examination of the patient [Fig. 5]. Below we describe the tests 
that are specific for picking up deficient lacrimal gland output 
in DED and then discuss the tests needed to comprehensively 
examine the eyelids and ocular surface. Identifying a reduction 
in tear volume in DED patients can also provide a clue that an 
individual has ADDE. It is critical to note that the diagnosis of 
SS is often made by the ophthalmologist, as symptoms of dry 
eyes are a presenting feature.[14] As such, the ophthalmologist 
has opportunity to reduce the delay in initiating treatment and 
improve long‑term quality of life by examining for ADDE and 
its accompanying features.
History
Dry eye symptoms are nonspecific in ADDE and can be 
similar to those of individuals with EDE. Symptoms include 
a sensation of dryness, burning or foreign body sensation, 
boring aching pain, and/or photophobia. Different dry eye 
questionnaires have been used to quantify symptoms, but no 
symptoms have been found to be specific for ADDE. A high 
suspicion of ADDE should be entertained if the patient gives 
a history of dry mouth, dry skin, and/or joint pains, history 
of allogenic HSCT, or history of skin or mucus membrane 
involvement in the form of rashes, eruptions, or ulceration. 
Figure 4: Diagnostic criteria laid by the international chronic ocular graft‑versus‑host disease consensus group.[12]
1336 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
In patients with DICC, characteristic temporal association 
of history of long‑term use of medications, particularly 
antiglaucoma medications, and ocular surface changes helps 
in clinching the diagnosis.[19]
Clinical examination of tear production and ocular surface
Schirmer test
A Whatman 41 filter paper is used for performing the Schirmer 
test, which measures the tear flow rate determined by measuring 
the length of wetting of the strip after 5 min. Historically, the 
Schirmer I test is performed without anesthesia and, thus, 
measures basal and reflex tearing. The Schirmer II test is also 
performed without anesthesia but is done following nasal 
stimulation and as such measures reflex tearing. The Schirmer 
test can also be performed with anesthesia, and this approach 
is thought to capture basal tearing. There is no consensus on 
the best way to perform the Schirmer test, and options include 
with or without anesthesia and with open or closed eyes. When 
performed with closed eyes and without anesthesia, the values 
show less variation.[27] The authors recommend performing the 
test without anesthesia and not immediately after the instillation 
of eyedrops. The authors consider a value less than 10 mm to 
indicate aqueous deficiency. Other groups consider a value less 
than 5 mm as the cutoff for diagnosing ADDE.[27]
Tear volume
Tear volume can be measured by assessing the tear meniscus 
height (TMH) on slit lamp or by using the anterior segment 
optical coherence tomography (OCT). TMH measured using 
OCT is more repeatable and reliable than slit‑lamp–based 
assessment. However, even with OCT, the value is highly 
subjective, operator dependent, and variable, depending 
on the time of last blink, prior fluorescein instillation, time 
of the day, illumination, temperature, and surrounding 
humidity. The reported normal TMH value using SD‑OCT is 
0.19–0.34 mm (standard deviation [SD] 0.02–0.15 mm, 
spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD‑
OCT)).[28,29] The reported TMH value in ADDE of SS 
etiology is 0.138 ± 0.05 mm and of non‑SS etiology is 
0.24 ± 0.081 mm, though specific etiology for non‑SS ADDE 
is not mentioned.[30] The TMH cutoff of 0.2 mm gave 98.3% 
sensitivity and 96.7% specificity in subjects diagnosed with 
ADDE based on the TFOS‑DEWS II criteria.[28] However, 
different OCT‑based TMH studies have used different cutoffs 
for diagnosing ADDE.
Measuring TMH using spectral domain OCT has also been 
reported in ADDE. In one study, an OCT‑measured TMH 
of <141 µm had a 91% sensitivity compared to a combination 
of DED tests, which were taken as the gold standard.[30]
OCT‑measured TMH has been reported the lowest in SS, 
followed by other causes of ADDE.[29,31] However, it depends 
upon ADDE severity as well, and correlation of TMH and 
other measures of ADDE (Schirmer) needs to be studied. 
Swept‑source OCT has also been used to measure TMH. 
One study reported the cutoff values of TMH, tear meniscus 
area, and volume of 191 µm, 12,360 µm2
, and 0.0473 
mm3
, respectively, as helpful in diagnosing DED but not 
specifically ADDE.[30] Tear strip meniscometry is a device 
similar to Schirmer test, which helps in assessing the wetness 
of the eye. It has the added benefit that it is quick, provides 
results within 5 s, and is a noninvasive method to quantify 
the tear volume.[32,33] However, its potential role in diagnosing 
ADDE or reliability in differentiating between types of DED 
is unclear. In clinical practice (without access to diagnostic 
devices), tear volume is assessed using Schirmer without 
anesthesia, and in eyes with variable readings or borderline 
values, lacrimal gland examination performed on slit lamp 
helps in differentiating the gland involvement in DED.
Lacrimal gland examination
Direct examination of the lacrimal gland’s palpebral lobe 
can differentiate between ADDE and other causes of DED. 
The palpebral lobe of the lacrimal gland can be assessed 
on slit‑lamp examination by asking the patient to look 
inferonasally while the examiner holds the upper eyelid 
Figure 5: Clues in the patient’s history and clinical findings that are suggestive of ADDE. ADDE = aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease
April 2023 1337 Donthineni, et al.: Practice patterns of aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease
superotemporally. In normal individuals and those with 
EDE, the palpebral lobe has a convex shape and smooth 
surface with a pinkish appearance, while in ADDE, the lobe 
becomes smaller, flatter in contour, and can have areas of 
fibrosis in patients with a cicatricial etiology of ADDE [Fig. 6]. 
The gland area might not be visible due to symblepharon 
in cicatrizing conjunctivitis.[34] Tear flow can be measured 
using a fluorescein strip applied over the exposed lobe area. 
The tear flow is significantly reduced in patients with ADDE 
compared to EDE.[19,35] In patients with alacrimia, one can 
find absent palpebral lobe of the lacrimal gland clinically 
or absent orbital lobe alone on radiological imaging of the 
lacrimal gland.[25] However, patients are symptomatic and 
have significant tear volume reduction in both total and 
isolated orbital lobe alacrimia.
Clinical examinations for other aspects of ocular surface 
health
Ocular surface staining
Due to the ongoing inflammation and subsequent injury to 
the epithelial cells and microvilli, the ocular surface often 
shows positive staining with vital dyes in individuals with 
ADDE. Sodium fluorescein, rose bengal, and lissamine 
green dyes are the most commonly used vital dyes. Positive 
fluorescein staining is seen when there is an epithelial 
defect or disruption in the tight junctions. Rose bengal 
stains devitalized cells and cells with absent mucin on the 
ocular surface, but associated stinging with instillation and 
reflex tearing limits its use in DED. Lissamine green stains 
the epithelial cells whose cell membrane is damaged. Our 
performed technique is to wet a fluorescein or lissamine 
green strip with one drop of saline and then lightly touch the 
inferior temporal fornix in upgaze, while the lower eyelid is 
pulled temporally. The ocular surface is assessed between 1 
and 3 min after instillation.[27] Use of predetermined volume 
of 10 µl of dye has also been advised, but this degree of 
precision is difficult to achieve in the clinic. There is no 
consensus on a gold standard value that should be included 
under the umbrella of DED. Despite this, important aspects 
to notice include the type (micro‑/macro‑punctate, coalescent 
macro‑punctate, or patch), extent, location, and depth of 
staining.[27,36,37] In ADDE, typically, the staining is in the 
interpalpebral area involving the mid to inferior cornea and 
bulbar conjunctiva [Fig. 7]. Different grading systems have 
been used in DED, including the van Bijsterveld system, 
the National Eye Institute/Industry Workshop guidelines, 
and the Oxford ocular surface staining score, to name a 
few. Analysis of 3514 patients of Sjögren’s International 
Collaborative Clinical Alliance Registry found that corneal 
staining with fluorescein and conjunctival staining with 
lissamine green (>5 on Oxford ocular surface staining 
score) was highly sensitive (91.1%) and specific (83.9%) for 
identifying patients of SS with keratoconjunctivitis sicca from 
SS patients without DED.[38]
Tear stability
Tear film instability can occur in ADDE and tests like tear 
film breakup time (TBUT) and clearance pattern assessment 
measure the degree of instability. The TBUT measures the 
time taken for the appearance of the first dry spot after 
a complete blink. A value <10 s indicates tear instability; 
however, it is a subjective test.[39,40] A study evaluated the 
different patterns of tear break up (area, line, spot, random) 
in 106 DED patients diagnosed using the Japanese dry eye 
Figure 6: Direct lacrimal gland examination in healthy and patients with ADDE and EDE. (A1, A2, B1, B2) Convex, pinkish palpebral lobe appearance 
with three or four secreting points observed in normal and EDE patients, respectively. (C1, 2) A small left palpebral lobe of a secondary Sjögren’s 
syndrome patient with only one secreting point, whereas in cicatrizing conjunctivitis, the palpebral lobe has whitish scarred appearance with a 
central area (spared of scarring) having secretory opening (D1, D2). ADDE = aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease, EDE = evaporative dry eye
1338 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
criteria (DED symptoms and TBUT ≤5 s or Schirmer ≤5 mm 
with positive staining). The fluorescein break in the shape of 
area and line correlated more with ADDE, rather than spot 
or random break shapes.[41] Fluorescein dye itself can cause 
tear film instability, and instilling it is considered invasive 
by some. Hence, placido disk‑based noncontact assessment 
of the tear film, known as noninvasive TBUT (NITBUT), was 
developed. Studies have found significant differences in TBUT 
and NITBUT values, and hence, these values cannot be used 
interchangeably. Overall, if the technology is available, an 
average value of multiple NIBUT measurements is preferred.
[42‑44] A low NIBUT, on its own, however, does not differentiate 
between DED subtypes. One study found similar NIBUT 
times in 22 individuals with SS (6.36 ± 4.32 s) compared to 22 
individuals with non‑SS DED (7.98 ± 4.60 s).[45] However, it 
is a useful metric to evaluate tear stability.
Meibomian gland health
Meibomian gland involvement in ADDE can be detected 
with clinical examination of lid margin (for vascular 
engorgement, irregularity, displacement of Marx line, or 
plugging of orifices), meibum quality (which can be graded 
as 0 [clear fluid], 1 [cloudy fluid], 2 [cloudy particulate], or 
3 [toothpaste like]), expressibility of the central eight glands 
of the upper and lower eyelids, and meibography.[27] Areas 
of gland loss and shortening of glands on meibography 
along with changes in meibum indicate abnormalities in 
the meibomian glands.
Examination for ocular surface scarring
The conjunctival changes in early stages of cicatricial ocular 
surface diseases can be easily missed unless we look carefully. 
The underlying pathology that we are most concerned about 
is MMP because it is progressive and can result in bilateral 
blinding keratopathy. It is, therefore, imperative to evert 
the eyelids and examine the lid margins, tarsal conjunctiva, 
medial and lateral canthal areas, and the fornices. Typically, 
patients with ocular MMP have diffuse bulbar conjunctival 
congestion, meibomian gland dropout, medial or lateral 
canthal fibrosis, or inferior forniceal foreshortening [Fig. 8]. 
An important differential of MMP is DICC, which can have 
specific features like periocular pigmentation, medial canthal 
fibrosis, and conjunctival fibrosis and keratinization which 
are more localized near the puncta and medial part of the 
inferior fornix.[19] Patients with SJS typically have a definite 
history of skin necrolysis and hospital admission, pigmentary 
changes in the skin, nail changes, lid margin keratinization, 
and distichiasis.[18] Most cases of cicatrizing conjunctivitis 
presenting with ADDE are limited to these three underlying 
diseases.
Nerve status
In vivo confocal microscopy of the lacrimal gland has been 
used to assess the acinar unit density, acinar unit diameter, and 
inflammatory cell density. However, it is difficult to use and 
specific data related to ADDE in large number of patients is 
not available.[46] Confocal microscopy of the corneal sub‑basal 
nerve plexus has been explored for differentiating the DED 
Figure 7: Clinical presentation of aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease in patients with immune‑mediated lacrimal gland damage. (A1–3) The ocular 
surface of the left eye of a middle‑aged female with serology positive for primary SS. (B1–3) The left eye of a middle‑aged female with secondary 
SS in the setting of rheumatoid arthritis. (C1–3) The right eye of a young male with GVHD. In all three cases, there is interpalpebral ocular surface 
staining, with minimal bulbar conjunctival congestion, and unlike the GVHD case (C3), no tarsal inflammation or forniceal shortening is noted in 
SS. GVHD = graft‑versus‑host disease, SS = Sjögren’s syndrome
April 2023 1339 Donthineni, et al.: Practice patterns of aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease
subtypes. Studies have shown that patients with ADDE have 
an increase in nerve beading and an increase in dendritic cell 
number compared to controls; however, there is variability 
between studies and it is difficult to apply these findings to 
an individual patient.[47,48]
Individuals with ADDE can have a component of NK,
neuropathic pain, or both. The diagnosis of NK is made 
by finding decreased corneal sensation and some degree 
of corneal epithelial staining. A component of neuropathic 
pain should be considered when individuals report evoked 
pain to wind and light, when increased corneal sensitivity 
(based on prompt blink, head retraction with light touch of the 
cotton tip) is elicited, or when there is an overall disconnect 
between patient‑reported symptoms and signs of disease. 
Clinical diagnosis of nerve involvement is based on cranial 
nerve examinations, assessing the corneal sensations, thorough 
ocular adnexal examination, and blink rate. Corneal sensations 
are checked with cotton tip or dental floss and are reported 
subjectively as normal, reduced, or hyperesthesia (increased 
based on prompt blink). Since the trigeminal nerve carries 
sensation from the ocular surface and periocular region, a 
palpation around the eye can provide information about 
allodynia and should be performed on both sides. A central 
component to pain is further suspected when individuals report 
persistent pain after topical anesthetic placement or report pain 
with light touch around the eye (i.e., cutaneous allodynia).[23]
Tear osmolarity
Inflammation and increased osmolarity typically accompany 
ADDE. The TearLab Osmolarity System (TearLab Corporation, 
San Diego, CA, USA) is currently the only US Food and Drug 
Administration (US FDA)‑approved, commercially available, 
in‑office device for measuring tear film osmolarity, with results 
available in a few seconds. Normal tear osmolarity has a value 
around 302 mOsm/L, with an inter‑eye difference of less than 
8 mOsm/L. Usually, a value above >308 mOsm/L or a difference 
between the eyes >8 mOsm/L is considered abnormal, but 
there are studies where different cutoffs have been used 
(308–315 mOsm/L).[27,49,50] Tear osmolarity increases with 
disease severity and displays higher variation at higher levels. 
There are conflicting reports about its utility as a differentiator 
between normal and DED patients.[4,49] The average osmolarity 
in 629 subjects with DED was no different than in 29 healthy 
subjects (310.6 ± 16.2 vs. 310.3 ± 19.4 mOsm/L). Tear osmolarity 
has not been studied as a marker to differentiate between 
ADDE and EDE.
Cytokines and biomarkers
Matrix metalloproteinase‑9 (MMP‑9) is an important 
endopeptidase released in the tear film due to chronic 
inflammation and extracellular matrix remodeling. 
MMP‑9 destroys the tight junctions and causes loss of the 
ocular surface barrier function. Currently, InflammaDry®
(Quidel, San Diego, CA, USA) is the only FDA‑approved device 
for the semi‑quantitative detection of MMP‑9 in patients. In 
one study, raised MMP‑9 levels predicted reduction in tear 
production over the next 6 months.[51] However, MMP‑9 can be 
elevated in a number of chronic inflammatory conditions, such 
as with microbial keratitis, and hence, the test is nonspecific for 
DED.[52‑54] Lactoferrin and lysozyme have also been explored 
Figure 8: Clinical presentation of aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease in patients with SS versus cicatrizing conjunctivitis. (A1-4) The ocular surface 
of the left eye of a middle‑aged female with serology positive for primary SS. (B1-4) The left eye of a middle‑aged female with secondary SS 
in the setting of rheumatoid arthritis. In both cases (a and b), there is interpalpebral staining on the corneal surface but no bulbar conjunctival 
inflammation or forniceal shortening. In case (C1-4), which is biopsy positive for mucus membrane pemphigoid, there is diffuse conjunctival 
congestion, along with corneal fluorescein staining and inferior forniceal foreshortening. SS = Sjögren’s syndrome
1340 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
Figure 9: The multidisciplinary teamwork and coordination needed to diagnose and comprehensively manage patients with ADDE. Once the 
diagnosis of ADDE is confirmed by the general ophthalmologist, the patient can be referred to a cornea/ocular surface specialist, who in conjunction 
with a rheumatologist, dermatologist, and/or oncologist can prepare the treatment plan and systemic medical regimen, as needed. The patient 
can then be followed by the general ophthalmologist, who can refer the patient back in case of worsening of symptoms or in the event of corneal 
or systemic complications. ADDE = aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease
as surrogate markers for lacrimal gland damage. Their levels 
are said to decrease in conditions such as SS; however, their 
application in the clinical setting to diagnose ADDE is yet to 
be determined.[55‑58]
Tests for cicatricial etiology
In eyes with a cicatricial ADDE etiology, after ruling out 
SJS,[18] conjunctival biopsy is performed to evaluate for 
MMP. The diagnosis is made by observing IgG, IgM, or 
complement deposition at the basement membrane zone 
by direct immunofluorescence. However, a negative 
biopsy result is still possible in individuals with MMP.[59]
To maximize accuracy, the biopsy should be taken from 
noninflamed conjunctiva and transferred appropriately to 
the laboratory. Some studies have shown that about 25% 
of patients need a repeat biopsy for a positive result.[59]
In patients with negative biopsy and strong suspicion of 
MMP, clinical cues can help in reaching the diagnosis and 
treatment of MMP is pursued.[13] As MMP is a progressive, 
blinding disease, an increase in lacrimal gland damage over 
time is likely if individuals are not treated with systemic 
immunosuppressives.
Blood work‑up for underlying systemic disease
Since ADDE can be associated with an underlying systemic 
disease like SS, a systemic work‑up to identify potential causes 
of disease is very important. For SS, anti‑Ro/La antibodies are 
evaluated which are part of the diagnostic criteria. However, 
not all patients with SS (diagnosed by clinical signs and 
positive biopsy) show antibody positivity. For such patients, 
rheumatoid factor, C‑reactive protein, and anti‑citrullinated 
peptide antibody can be tested.[6,60] Consultation with a 
rheumatologist is helpful in diagnosing suspected underlying 
autoimmune diseases, as they can advise on which tests to 
order (ANA profile, serum antinuclear antibody, angiotensin 
converting enzyme (ACE)) based on patients’ symptoms and 
signs [Fig. 9].
Management of ADDE
The prescribed step‑by‑step approach is based on the 
confirmation of aqueous deficiency as the cause of DED 
and elucidating the underlying cause of ADDE. In cases 
with suspected immune etiology, collaboration with a 
rheumatologist can be of benefit in a patient with both ocular 
and systemic involvement. Signs of conjunctival cicatrization 
necessitate a referral to an ocular surface disease specialist 
to assist in diagnosis. Once the cause has been established 
and disease‑specific systemic therapy, if necessary, has 
been initiated, several therapeutic and surgical approaches 
can help in improving signs and symptoms of disease. The 
mechanisms of action of different topical drugs used for 
ADDE are highlighted in Fig. 10.
Nonspecific therapy in ADDE
Lubricants
Since the root cause of symptoms and signs of DED is a 
deficiency of tears, tear substitutes are used as the first‑line 
agents in ADDE management. They lubricate the ocular surface, 
increase the tear film reservoir, and stabilize osmolarity. There 
are various types of artificial tears available that mimic the 
different layers of tear film; hence, they must be individualized 
as per the patient’s need. The various formulations available 
include cellulose ethers, carbomers, polyvinyl alcohol, and 
lipid‐based formulations, which mainly differ in their viscosity 
and retention power. Many of these products are mixed with 
preservatives, which cause a stinging sensation upon instillation 
and worsen symptoms temporarily. Since the preservative itself 
can cause ocular surface toxicity, a preservative‑free compound 
is preferred for patients with severe DED.[61,62]
April 2023 1341 Donthineni, et al.: Practice patterns of aqueous‑deficient dry eye diseaseFigure 10: Classification, mechanism of action, and the effect on ocular surface of various topical drugs used in the treatment of ADDE. ADDE = aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease, ICAM‑1 = intercellular adhesion molecule 1, LG = lacrimal gland, M3 = muscarinic 3, PG = prostaglandins, TFEB = transcription factor EB, TNF‑α = tumor necrosis factor‑alpha
1342 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
Topical immunosuppressants or immunomodulators
Most cases of ADDE have a component of inflammation and 
immune system dysregulation. ADDE of cicatricial etiology 
usually has persistent ocular surface inflammation. As such, 
topical immunosuppressive agents and immune modulators 
are often used in ADDE. Topical corticosteroids are generally 
used for a short term to address ocular surface inflammation. 
However, as their long‑term use is associated with various 
side effects, immunomodulatory drugs are preferred. 
Cyclosporine A (CsA) inhibits T‑cell activation by inhibiting 
the calcineurin–phosphatase pathway. It also reduces the 
apoptosis of goblet cells. Several strengths of CsA are approved 
by the FDA, including 0.05%, 0.09%, and 0.1% (the latter of 
which is approved for atopic keratoconjunctivitis and not dry 
eye). The 0.05% cyclosporine emulsion (Restasis; Allergan 
Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) showed increase in tear production and 
reduced ocular surface staining in a randomized clinical trial 
of 877 subjects with ADDE (Schirmer <5 mm at 5 min).[63‑64]
A preservative‑free nanoformulation of cyclosporine, 0.09% 
cyclosporine aqueous solution (Cequa; Sun Pharmaceutical 
Industries, Inc., Cranbury, NJ, USA), has shown better 
drug penetration in the conjunctival and scleral tissues of 
New Zealand white rabbits, compared to 0.05% cyclosporine 
emulsion. Studies have shown a reduction in conjunctival 
and corneal staining with an increase in Schirmer values at 
3 months of its use in 371 DED patients (diagnosed based 
on symptom and conjunctival staining score ≥3). Of note, 
the mean baseline Schirmer value was 11.9 ± 7.8 mm in this 
population, and hence, not all individuals had ADDE.[65]
Lifitegrast 5% (Xiidra; Novartis, East Hanover, NJ, USA), 
is a nanoparticle formulation that inhibits the binding of 
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM‑1) to lymphocyte 
function‑associated antigen 1 (LFA‑1) required for T‑cell 
activation and was approved in 2016 for DED. A reduction in 
corneal staining score and an improvement in symptomatology 
were observed in 718 subjects with DED (<10 mm Schirmer 
and >2 corneal staining score) who used lifitegrast for 84 days. 
Its efficacy for mild–moderate DED has been established, 
but further studies are needed for severe ADDE.[66‑69]
Many other anti‑inflammatory and immune‑modulatory 
molecules are under investigation, including an siRNA 
inhibitor, a nonspecific kinase inhibitor, the tear protein 
lacritin, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors. Multiple 
other treatment modalities to promote the body’s natural 
anti‑inflammatory mechanism are described, which include 
oral supplementation with omega‑3 polyunsaturated fatty 
acids (PUFAs), curcumin, and antioxidants, which suppress 
interleukins and the inflammatory cascade.[70,71] However their 
specific role in ADDE is uncertain.
Secretagogues
These are drugs which mainly act on the receptors in the ocular 
surface and help in increasing the tear production. Diquafosol 
tetrasodium, 3% ophthalmic solution, currently approved in 
Japan for patients with DED, acts on P2Y2 receptors in the 
conjunctiva, meibomian and lacrimal glands, and corneal 
and conjunctival epithelium.[72] It increases tear production 
by increasing intracellular calcium and stimulating fluid and 
mucin secretion from conjunctival epithelial and goblet cells.[72]
Thus, it is believed that diquafosol achieves rehydration of the 
ocular surface independent of the lacrimal gland secretion. In 
a study of 15 individuals with ADDE, diquafosol improved 
ocular surface staining, TMH, and symptoms when used for 
6 months.[72,73] However, no significant change was noted 
in Schirmer values, contrary to it being a secretagogue. 
Rebamipide 2% increases both the membrane‑associated and 
secreted mucins by acting on the conjunctival goblet cells and 
corneal epithelial cells, causing improved surface healing 
and an increase in tear film stability. In addition, it prevents 
macrophage infiltration into the conjunctiva by increasing 
prostaglandins (PGE2 and PGI2) and reducing TNF‑α, with 
an overall effect of lowering ocular surface inflammation. In 
a study of 308 individuals with DED (not ADDE specifically), 
4 weeks of rebamipide use improved ocular surface staining, 
TBUT, and symptoms of DED, but no change in Schirmer 
values was noted.[74‑77] Cevimeline hydrochloride, a cholinergic 
agonist, binds to muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, thereby 
increasing lacrimal gland secretion.[78,79] Four weeks of 
cevimeline 20 mg three times a day improved corneal staining 
in 47% of SS patients (total = 19), with a mean change of 
0.9 ± 2.22 in Schirmer with anesthesia test. Oral pilocarpine 
has a similar mechanism and has been used to increase both 
salivary and aqueous tear production. It has been shown 
to improve symptoms of dry mouth and dry eye and the 
salivary flow rate in 373 individuals with SS, but objective 
signs related to DED were not studied.[80] Hence, its efficacy in 
improving tear secretion is uncertain. Recently, a nasal spray, 
varenicline (Tyrvaya; Oyster Point Pharma, New Jersey, USA), 
has shown promising results in improving tear production in 
ADDE. It acts by stimulating the nicotinic receptors in nasal 
mucosa which relay signals to the secretomotor pathway of 
the lacrimal gland.[81]
Autologous serum
Serum has lysozyme, fibronectin, vitamin A, and others, 
which resemble the constituents of natural tears needed for 
maintenance of the ocular surface and are thus a good option 
for supplementation in patients with ADDE. In a study of 
20 individuals with severe ADDE (mean Schirmer of 3.8 mm), 
20% autologous serum (higher concentration of 50% has also 
been used) was useful in reducing symptoms and improving 
corneal staining.[82]
Alternative therapies
Scleral contact lenses are used in ADDE with severe 
epitheliopathy when conventional treatments have failed 
to offer symptomatic relief. These large‑diameter lenses are 
commonly used in cicatricial ADDE. Neuronal stimulation 
to increase the tear production has shown to be an effective 
treatment approach for lacrimal gland–associated ADDE. 
Intranasal anterior ethmoidal nerve stimulation done 
with TrueTear (Allergan, Dublin, Ireland) increased tear 
production compared to sham treatment in 48 individuals 
with ADDE (<10 mm Schirmer values).[83] However, the 
product is no longer available. The iTEAR
100 device, which 
is currently available, stimulates the anterior ethmoidal 
nerves from an external approach. Studies have shown 
reduction in OSDI scores and an increase in post‑stimulation 
Schirmer value in 101 individuals with anesthetized Schirmer 
value of <10 mm pre‑stimulation. However, for enrollment, 
subjects were required to demonstrate an increase of 10 mm 
in Schirmer value upon nasal stimulation using a cotton 
wisp.[84] Hence, this study only examined subjects who could 
obtain a 10 mm improvement with simple nasal stimulation. 
April 2023 1343 Donthineni, et al.: Practice patterns of aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease
Trehalose, present naturally in various species of plants and 
nonmammalian animals, is a disaccharide with high water 
retention ability. It protects the corneal epithelium against 
desiccation, inflammation, and apoptosis occurring due to 
hyperosmotic and oxidative stress and also has an adjuvant 
role in autophagy, thereby possibly improving tear film 
homeostasis in DED.[85] Other treatment alternatives being 
studied in ADDE include royal jelly, platelet‑rich plasma, 
omega‑3 fatty acids, and botulinum toxin A. However, 
further studies are needed to test their safety and efficacy in 
ADDE.[86,87]
Punctal occlusion
Punctal occlusion can be done by insertion of punctal plugs 
or by performing punctal cautery. These are useful in patients 
with moderate to severe ADDE to block the drainage pathway 
of the tears, thereby increasing tear retention. However, there 
is some concern that occluding the lacrimal punctum may 
build up the inflammatory load in the conjunctival sac, and 
thus, it is recommended that ocular surface inflammation 
be controlled before placement. Of 80 patients with DED, 
punctal plugs improved symptoms (in 54%) and decreased 
the frequency of lubricant instillation but the outcomes 
specific to ADDE are not known.[88] However, there is no 
conclusive evidence that punctal plugs are superior to other 
treatments such as topical lubricants or secretagogues. Punctal 
cautery has also been used in individuals with chronic 
severe ADDE, especially for those with punctal plug fitting 
issues. The evidence is of low certainty regarding the effects 
of punctal cautery on dry eye symptoms, tear volume, and 
ocular staining in a Cochrane review.[89] Furthermore, the 
intervention may need to be repeated due to recanalization, 
especially when concurrent steroids are used.[88,89]
Disease‑specific therapy in ADDE
Systemic immunomodulation in SS
Patients with primary SS who have ocular involvement 
i n i s o l a t i o n a r e u s u a l l y m a n a g e d w i t h t o p i c a l 
immunomodulation. Systemic immunosuppression is 
indicated when the disease is progressive and extraglandular 
involvement, such as arthritis or Raynaud’s phenomenon, is 
seen.[5,8] Mild cases are managed with hydroxychloroquine, 
while those with moderate to severe disease are treated with 
oral corticosteroids and nonsteroidal immunosuppressive 
agents.[5,8] The latter group includes mycophenolate mofetil. 
The primary underlying autoimmune disease in patients 
with secondary SS usually dictates the immunomodulatory 
agent chosen. Additionally, the duration of disease and the 
severity at presentation also determine the type and degree 
of immunosuppression instituted. Oral methotrexate is 
preferred as a first‑line agent in patients who have RA.[60]
This medication has a once‑weekly dosing regimen and an 
overall safe side effect profile.[90] Both oral azathioprine and 
mycophenolate mofetil are used as second‑line agents, and 
several biological agents (e.g., adalimumab, rituximab, and 
toclizumab) have shown promising results in controlling 
the disease progression.[88] A similar protocol which 
combines oral corticosteroids with calcineurin inhibitors and 
antimetabolites is also considered in patients with SLE.[91]
Systemic immunosuppression in MMP
MMP (including the subtype OCP) is a progressive group 
of diseases, which if left unchecked, can lead to sight‑ and 
globe‑threatening sequelae. As discussed earlier, these 
are autoimmune disorders, and thus require systemic 
immunosuppression for their management.[90,92] Several 
agents have been described for the control of inflammation 
in MMP, and a step ladder approach has been proposed to 
systematically manage this entity. The first line of therapy 
for cases with mild disease is dapsone, and screening of 
cases with glucose‑6‑phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency 
is required to prevent hemolytic anemia.[90,92,93] Patients with 
moderately severe disease are started on a course of oral 
corticosteroid (prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day), which is given 
as a tapering dose.[90] This is combined with methotrexate, 
mycophenolate mofetil, or azathioprine to provide long‑term 
immunosuppression.[92,93] Patients who present with a severe 
stage of the disease or with acute exacerbations will require 
a pulse dose of intravenous methylprednisolone in isolation 
or in combination with intravenous cyclophosphamide.[90,92]
Biologic agents (infliximab, etanercept, and rituximab) 
and intravenous immunoglobulins have been proven to be 
efficacious in patients with refractory disease.[92]
Minor salivary gland transplantation for cicatricial severe ADDE
The surgery was first described in 1997 for patients with 
severe ADDE (<2 mm Schirmer value) of cicatricial origin 
and persistent symptoms despite lubricant use.[94] The graft 
tissue is obtained from the oral labial mucosa and transplanted 
onto the posterior eyelid lamella or the conjunctival fornix. It 
has been reported to improve Schirmer values by an average 
of 2–4 mm. Clinical tests can be helpful while selecting the 
donor site of the graft tissue. Fluorescein strip is applied to 
assess the number of functional openings and the secretory 
rate of the glands. This can be done preoperatively while 
selecting the graft site and postoperatively in the transplanted 
graft on the ocular surface.[95,96] Minor salivary gland 
transplantation (MSGT) is not recommended in Sjögren’s 
type of DED, since the underlying disease process affects both 
the salivary and the lacrimal glands and hence would not be 
beneficial in these patients.[94]
ADDE with NK
Treatment varies based on the stage of the disease: stage 
1 (punctate keratopathy) mainly needs lubricants and eyelid 
taping; stage 2 (persistent epithelial defects with rolled edges) 
requires a bandage contact lens, aggressive topical lubricants 
and steroids, autologous serum eye drops, and tarsorrhaphy; 
and stage 3 (ulcer) is difficult to treat and requires surgical 
interventions such as amniotic membrane transplantation 
(AMT), conjunctival flap, or corneal neurotization.[96]
Recent studies show the efficacy of topical formulation of 
recombinant nerve growth factor cenegermin(Oxervate; Dompé 
Farmaceutici SpA, Milan, Italy) with faster healing rates and 
reduced recurrences of epithelial defects compared to placebo. 
As such, it is now a preferred treatment in the USA for stage 
2 and 3 NK.[94]
ADDE with neuropathic component to pain
Treatment of neuropathic ocular pain is evolving, but 
topical, periocular, and oral neuromodulatory agents can 
all be considered. Topically, autologous serum eye drops 
are often used in individuals with a suspected peripheral 
component of pain. A transient receptor potential vanilloid 
subtype 1 antagonist is being studied as a treatment for 
1344 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
persistent postoperative pain. Scleral contact lenses can be 
considered as they may help decrease firing in sensitizing 
nerves.[97] Periocular neuromodulatory strategies include 
botulinum toxin injections and nerve stimulators. Oral 
approaches are those used for neuropathic pain outside the eye, 
including pregabalin, nortriptyline, and topiramate, to name 
a few. These agents are often coupled with mood stabilizers 
such as duloxetine (a serotonin‑ and norepinephrine‑reuptake 
inhibitor). Vitamin deficiencies should also be investigated, 
such as Vitamin B12 deficiency.[98] Vitamin B12 promotes 
reinnervation and re‑epithelialization of the corneal surface 
by hindering the nociceptive activity.[99‑102]
Unmet Needs and Future Directions
Gut microbiome modulation in SS
Altered gut microbiome has been implicated in the 
pathophysiology of autoimmune conditions such as SS and 
associated DED.[103] As such, supplementation with probiotics 
or metabolites of commensal bacteria have been discussed as 
an approach for the treatment of DED. Another approach is 
the transplant of healthy fecal flora, a therapy known as fecal 
microbial transplant. However, this treatment modality is 
still in its initial stages, and further trials are needed to prove 
its efficacy and safety and to establish the effective route of 
microbiome transfer.[91,104‑106]
Mesenchymal stem cell therapy for lacrimal gland 
regeneration
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) possess immunomodulatory 
properties, are easily available, and have multilineage 
differentiation abilities. They also have anti‑inflammatory 
properties by inhibiting the activation and proliferation of T 
cells and upregulating anti‑inflammatory cytokines. Hence, 
they are useful in treating patients with autoimmune DED. 
Injection of MSCs into the lacrimal gland has shown to decrease 
infiltration of CD4+ cells. It has a potential role in treating 
patients with severe, refractory ADDE and steroid‑resistant 
GVHD.[80,107,108]
Bioengineered lacrimal gland
Lacrimal gland regeneration using MSCs is one of the main 
focuses of current research, which is gaining popularity.[109‑111]
Further advances include the development of bioengineered 
lacrimal glands producing tears mimicking human tears 
in composition.[112] Researchers have also established 3D 
organoids of the human lacrimal gland, which can engraft and 
produce mature tear products after orthotopic transplantation 
in mice.[113] Organoids can be expanded over multiple months 
and recapitulate morphological and transcriptional features 
of lacrimal ducts. These breath‑taking novel approaches are 
awaiting clinical translation.
Conclusion
ADDE, although less common than EDE, is the more serious 
clinical form of DED as it may cause long‑term ocular morbidity 
and impair vision. Therefore, timely diagnosis and initiation 
of treatment is key in preventing chronic complications of 
ADDE. This requires a high index of suspicion in patients with 
complaints of dryness associated with dry mouth, dry skin, 
and joint pains and a history of associated systemic diseases 
or of allogeneic HSCT. In autoimmune conditions like SS, 
ADDE may be the first manifestation of the systemic disease, 
even before antibody positivity,[62] which emphasizes the 
important role of ophthalmologist in caring for these patients. 
It is also imperative to understand that some ADDE patients 
will have an underlying systemic disease, and therefore, 
multidisciplinary care with a rheumatologist, dermatologist, 
and/or hemato‑oncologist may be required. It is also equally 
important to rule out clinical masquerades, especially patients 
with EDE, to avoid unnecessary systemic evaluation or 
medication. Sometimes, the underlying cause can be the use of 
topical or systemic medications, and their simple withdrawal 
can reverse symptoms. Once the diagnosis of ADDE has been 
confirmed clinically, it is best for a general ophthalmologist 
to refer these patients to an ocular surface clinic, where the 
necessary systemic evaluation and consultation with other 
medical specialists, if required, is possible. It is critical to 
understand that adequate care of many cases of ADDE is not 
possible through symptomatic or palliative treatment with 
topical lubricants and anti‑inflammatory medications alone. 
This is particularly true for conjunctival cicatrizing diseases like 
MMP that can progress relentlessly without systemic therapy 
and lead to devastating keratopathy and blindness. This review 
summarizes the elements that the authors feel are key to 
confirming the diagnosis of ADDE, identifying the underlying 
cause, and initiating appropriate therapy to improve the lives 
of patients afflicted with this condition.
Funding
Dr Swati Singh is funded by SERB startup research grant (SRG‑
2021-000131),India and the Hyderabad Eye Research Foundation 
(HERF) has provided the financial and infrastructure support 
for this work.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Donthineni PR, Kammari P, Shanbhag SS, Singh V, DasAV, Basu S. 
Incidence, demographics, types and risk factors of dry eye disease 
in India: Electronic medical records driven big data analytics report 
I. Ocul Surf 2019;17:250‑6.
2. Stapleton F, Alves M, Bunya VY, Jalbert I, Lekhanont K, Malet F, 
et al. TFOS DEWS II epidemiology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:334‑65.
3. Galor A, Levitt RC, Felix ER, Sarantopoulos CD. Understanding 
the true burden of dry eye disease. Expert Rev Ophthalmol 
2015;10:403‑5.
4. Craig JP, Nelson JD, Azar DT, Belmonte C, Bron AJ, Chauhan SK, 
et al. TFOS DEWS II report executive summary. Ocul Surf 
2017;15:802‑12.
5. Negrini S, Emmi G, Greco M, Borro M, Sardanelli F, Murdaca G, 
et al. Sjögren’s syndrome: A systemic autoimmune disease. Clin 
Exp Med 2022;22:9‑25.
6. Vitali C, Bombardieri S, Jonsson R, Moutsopoulos HM, 
Alexander EL, Carsons SE, et al. Classification criteria for Sjögren’s 
syndrome: A revised version of the European criteria proposed 
by the American‑European Consensus Group. Ann Rheum Dis 
2002;61:554‑8.
7. Shiboski CH, Shiboski SC, Seror R, Criswell LA, Labetoulle M, 
Lietman TM, et al. 2016 American College of Rheumatology/
European League against rheumatism classification criteria 
for primary Sjögren’s syndrome: A consensus and data‑driven 
methodology involving three International patient cohorts. 
Arthritis Rheumatol 2017;69:35‑45.
April 2023 1345 Donthineni, et al.: Practice patterns of aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease
8. Wang J, Zhou L, Liu B. Update on disease pathogenesis, diagnosis, 
and management of primary Sjögren’s syndrome. Int J Rheum Dis 
2020;23:723‑7.
9. Tian Y, Yang H, Liu N, Li Y, Chen J. Advances in pathogenesis of 
Sjögren’s syndrome. J Immunol Res 2021;2021:5928232.
10. Carreno‑Galeano JT, Dohlman TH, Kim S, Yin J, Dana R. 
A review of ocular graft‑versus‑host disease: Pathophysiology, 
clinical presentation and management. Ocul Immunol Inflamm 
2021;29:1190‑9.
11. Nair S, Vanathi M, Mukhija R, Tandon R, Jain S, Ogawa Y. 
Update on ocular graft‑versus‑host disease. Indian J Ophthalmol 
2021;69:1038‑50.
12. Ogawa Y, Kim SK, Dana R, Clayton J, Jain S, Rosenblatt MI, 
et al. International chronic ocular graft‑vs‑host‑disease (GVHD) 
consensus group: Proposed diagnostic criteria for chronic 
GVHD (Part I). Sci Rep 2013;3:3419.
13. Vazirani J, Donthineni PR, Goel S, Sane SS, Mahuvakar S, Narang P, 
et al. Chronic cicatrizing conjunctivitis: A review of the differential 
diagnosis and an algorithmic approach to management. Indian J 
Ophthalmol 2020;68:2349‑55.
14. Kohanim S, Palioura S, Saeed HN, Akpek EK, Amescua G, Basu S, 
et al. Stevens‑Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis‑‑A 
comprehensive review and guide to therapy. I. Systemic disease. 
Ocul Surf 2016;14:2‑19.
15. Patel TK, Barvaliya MJ, Sharma D, Tripathi C. A systematic 
review of the drug‑induced Stevens‑Johnson syndrome and toxic 
epidermal necrolysis in Indian population. Indian J Dermatol 
Venereol Leprol 2013;79:389‑98.
16. Charlton OA, Harris V, Phan K, Mewton E, Jackson C, Cooper A. 
Toxic epidermal necrolysis and Steven‑Johnson syndrome: 
A comprehensive review. Adv Wound Care (New Rochelle) 
2020;9:426‑39.
17. Kohanim S, Palioura S, Saeed HN, Akpek EK, Amescua G, 
Basu S, et al. Acute and chronic ophthalmic involvement in 
Stevens‑Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis ‑ A 
comprehensive review and guide to therapy. II. Ophthalmic 
disease. Ocul Surf 2016;14:168‑88.
18. Shanbhag SS, Chanda S, Donthineni PR, Sane SS, Priyadarshini SR, 
Basu S. Clinical clues predictive of Stevens‑Johnson syndrome as 
the cause of chronic cicatrising conjunctivitis. Br J Ophthalmol 
2020;104:1005‑9.
19. Singh S, Mishra DK, Shanbhag S, Vemuganti G, Singh V, Ali MJ, 
et al. Lacrimal gland involvement in severe dry eyes after 
Stevens‑Johnson syndrome. Ophthalmology 2021;128:621‑4.
20. Singh S, Donthineni PR, Shanbhag SS, Senthil S, Ong HS, Dart JK, 
et al. Drug induced cicatrizing conjunctivitis: A case series with 
review of etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and management. Ocul Surf 
2022;24:83‑92.
21. DuaHS, SaidDG, MessmerEM, RolandoM, Benitez‑Del‑CastilloJM, 
Hossain PN, et al. Neurotrophic keratopathy. Prog Retin Eye Res 
2018;66:107‑31.
22. Singh S, Das AV, Ali MH. Ocular involvement in facial nerve 
paralysis: Risk factors for severe visual impairment and 
ocular surface exposure in 1870 patients. Orbit 2022:1‑6. doi: 
10.1080/01676830.2022.2090013.
23. Yoo TK, Oh E. Diabetes mellitus is associated with dry eye 
syndrome: A meta‑analysis. Int Ophthalmol 2019;39:2611‑20.
24. Rosenthal P, Borsook D. Ocular neuropathic pain. Br J Ophthalmol 
2016;100:128‑34.
25. Singh S. Congenital alacrimia with lacrimal gland hypoplasia. 
Orbit 2021;1. doi: 10.1080/01676830.2021.1942503.
26. Gupta N, Farooqui JH, Agni M, Kumar A, Sharma M, Mathur U. 
Alacrima, a rare cause of pediatric dry eye. JAAPOS 2018;22:233‑5.
27. Wolffsohn JS, Arita R, Chalmers R, Djalilian A, Dogru M, 
Dumbleton K, et al. TFOS DEWS II diagnostic methodology report. 
Ocul Surf 2017;15:539‑74.
28. Singh A, Vanathi M, Kishore A, Gupta N, Tandon R. Evaluation 
of strip meniscometry, tear meniscus height and depth in the 
diagnosis of dry eye disease in asian Indian eyes. Ocul Surf 
2019;17:747‑52.
29. Akiyama R, Usui T, Yamagami S. Diagnosis of dry eye by tear 
meniscus measurements using anterior segment swept source 
optical coherence tomography. Cornea 2015;34(Suppl 11):S115‑20.
30. QiuX, Gong L, LuY, Jin H, Robitaille M. The diagnostic significance 
of Fourier‑domain optical coherence tomography in Sjögren 
syndrome, aqueous tear deficiency and lipid tear deficiency 
patients. Acta Ophthalmol 2012;90:e359‑66.
31. Nichols KK, Mitchell GL, Zadnik K. The repeatability of clinical 
measurements of dry eye. Cornea 2004;23:272‑85.
32. Dogru M, Ishida K, MatsumotoY, Goto E, Ishioka M, Kojima T, et al. 
Strip meniscometry: A new and simple method of tear meniscus 
evaluation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:1895‑901.
33. Ibrahim OM, Dogru M, Ward SK, Matsumoto Y, Wakamatsu TH, 
Ishida K, et al. The efficacy, sensitivity, and specificity of 
strip meniscometry in conjunction with tear function tests in 
the assessment of tear meniscus. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 
2011;52:2194‑8.
34. Singh S, Shanbhag SS, Basu S. Palpebral lobe of the human lacrimal 
gland: Morphometric analysis in normal versus dry eyes. Br J 
Ophthalmol 2021;105:1352‑7.
35. Singh S, Shanbhag SS, Basu S. Tear secretion from the lacrimal 
gland: Variations in normal versus dry eyes. Br J Ophthalmol 
2022;106:772‑6.
36. Begley C, Caffery B, Chalmers R, Situ P, Simpson T, Nelson JD. 
Review and analysis of grading scales for ocular surface staining. 
Ocul Surf 2019;17:208‑20.
37. Bron AJ, Evans VE, Smith JA. Grading of corneal and conjunctival 
staining in the context of other dry eye tests. Cornea 2003;22:640‑50.
38. Gonzales JA, ShiboskiSC, BunyaVY, AkpekEK, Rose‑NussbaumerJ, 
Seitzman GD, et al. Ocular clinical signs and diagnostic tests most 
compatible with keratoconjunctivitis sicca: A latent class approach. 
Cornea 2020;39:1013‑6.
39. Lemp MA, Hamill JR Jr. Factors affecting tear film breakup in 
normal eyes. Arch Ophthalmol 1973;89:103‑5.
40. Tsubota K. Short tear film breakup time‑type dry eye. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2018;59:DES64‑70.
41. Yokoi N, Georgiev GA, Kato H, Komuro A, Sonomura Y, 
Sotozono C, et al. Classification of fluorescein breakup patterns: 
A novel method of differential diagnosis for dry eye. Am J 
Ophthalmol 2017;180:72‑85.
42. Hong J, Sun X, Wei A, Cui X, Li Y, Qian T, et al. Assessment of tear 
film stability in dry eye with a newly developed keratograph. 
Cornea 2013;32:716‑21.
43. Fuller DG, Potts K, Kim J. Noninvasive tear breakup times and 
ocular surface disease. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90:1086‑91.
44. Cho P, Douthwaite W. The relation between invasive and 
noninvasive tear break‑up time. Optom Vis Sci 1995;72:17‑22.
45. Zhao S, Le Q. Analysis of the first tear film break‑up point in 
Sjögren’s syndrome and non‑Sjögren’s syndrome dry eye patients. 
BMC Ophthalmol 2022;22:1.
46. Spurr‑Michaud S, Argüeso P, Gipson I. Assay of mucins in human 
tear fluid. Exp Eye Res 2007;84:939‑50.
47. Hwang J, Dermer H, Galor A. Can in vivo confocal microscopy 
differentiate between sub‑types of dry eye disease? A review. Clin 
Exp Ophthalmol 2021;49:373‑87.
48. Mercado C, Muñoz‑Ortiz J, Godin F, GalorA. Confocal microscopy 
abnormalities preceding antibody positivity and manifestations 
1346 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
of Sjogren’s syndrome. Ocul Immunol Inflamm 2022:1‑5. doi: 
10.1080/09273948.2022.2103713.
49. Tashbayev B, Utheim TP, Utheim ØA, Ræder S, Jensen JL, 
Yazdani M, et al. Utility of tear osmolarity measurement in 
diagnosis of dry eye disease. Sci Rep 2020;10:5542.
50. Lemp MA, BronAJ, Baudouin C, Benítez Del Castillo JM, Geffen D, 
Tauber J, et al. Tear osmolarity in the diagnosis and management 
of dry eye disease. Am J Ophthalmol 2011;151:792‑8.e1.
51. Soifer M, Mousa HM, Stinnett SS, Galor A, Perez VL. Matrix 
metalloproteinase 9 positivity predicts long term decreased tear 
production. Ocul Surf 2021;19:270‑4.
52. Lanza NL, McClellan AL, Batawi H, Felix ER, Sarantopoulos KD, 
Levitt RC, et al. Dry eye profiles in patients with a positive elevated 
surface matrix metalloproteinase 9 point‑of‑care test versus 
negative patients. Ocul Surf 2016;14:216‑23.
53. Messmer EM, von Lindenfels V, Garbe A, Kampik A. Matrix 
Metalloproteinase 9 testing in dry eye disease using a commercially 
available point‑of‑care immunoassay. Ophthalmology 
2016;123:2300‑8.
54. Sivak JM, Fini ME. MMPs in the eye: Emerging roles for matrix 
metalloproteinases in ocular physiology. Prog Retin Eye Res 
2002;21:1‑14.
55. Pinto‑Fraga J, Enríquez‑de‑Salamanca A, Calonge M, 
González‑García MJ, López‑Miguel A, López‑de la Rosa A, 
et al. Severity, therapeutic, and activity tear biomarkers in dry 
eye disease: An analysis from a phase III clinical trial. Ocul Surf 
2018;16:368‑76.
56. Flanagan JL, Willcox MD. Role of lactoferrin in the tear film. 
Biochimie 2009;91:35‑43.
57. DanjoY, LeeM, HorimotoK, HamanoT. Ocular surface damage and 
tear lactoferrin in dry eye syndrome. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 
1994;72:433‑7.
58. Sonobe H, Ogawa Y, Yamada K, Shimizu E, Uchino Y, Kamoi M, 
et al. A novel and innovative paper‑based analytical device 
for assessing tear lactoferrin of dry eye patients. Ocul Surf 
2019;17:160‑6.
59. Taurone S, Spoletini M, Ralli M, Gobbi P, Artico M, Imre L, et al. 
Ocular mucous membrane pemphigoid: A review. Immunol Res 
2019;67:280‑9.
60. Smolen JS, Aletaha D, McInnes IB. Rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet 
2016;388:2023‑38.
61. Lemp MA. Management of dry eye disease. Am J Manag Care 
2008;14 (3 Suppl):S88‑101.
62. Pucker AD, Ng SM, Nichols JJ. Over the counter (OTC) artificial 
tear drops for dry eye syndrome. Cochrane Database syst Rev 
2016;2:Cd009729.
63. Periman LM, Perez VL, Saban DR, Lin MC, Neri P. The 
immunological basis of dry eye disease and current topical 
treatment options. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2020;36:137‑46.
64. Tuan HI, Chi SC, Kang YN. An updated systematic review with 
meta‑analysis of randomized trials on topical cyclosporin A for 
dry‑eye disease. Drug Des Devel Ther 2020;14:265‑74.
65. Mandal A, Gote V, Pal D, Ogundele A, Mitra AK. Ocular 
pharmacokinetics of a topical ophthalmic nanomicellar solution of 
cyclosporine (Cequa®) for dry eye disease. Pharm Res 2019;36:36.
66. AbidiA, Shukla P, AhmadA. Lifitegrast: A novel drug for treatment 
of dry eye disease. J Pharmacol Pharmacother 2016;7:194‑8.
67. HsuehPY, JuY, VegaA, EdmanMC, MacKayJA, Hamm‑Alvarez SF. 
A multivalent ICAM‑1 binding nanoparticle which Inhibits ICAM‑1 
and LFA‑1 interaction represents a new tool for the investigation 
of autoimmune‑mediated dry eye. Int J Mol Sci 2020;21:2758.
68. Semba CP, Gadek TR. Development of lifitegrast: A novel T‑cell 
inhibitor for the treatment of dry eye disease. Clin Ophthalmol 
2016;10:1083‑94.
69. Donnenfeld ED, Karpecki PM, Majmudar PA, Nichols KK, 
Raychaudhuri A, Roy M, et al. Safety of lifitegrast ophthalmic 
solution 5.0% in patients with dry eye disease: A 1‑year, multicenter, 
randomized, placebo‑controlled study. Cornea 2016;35:741‑8.
70. Sheppard JD Jr, Singh R, McClellan AJ, Weikert MP, Scoper SV, 
Joly TJ, et al. Long‑term supplementation With n‑6 and n‑3 
PUFAs improves moderate‑to‑severe keratoconjunctivitis sicca: 
A randomized double‑blind clinical trial. Cornea 2013;32:1297‑304.
71. Rogers NM, Kireta S, Coates PT. Curcumin induces 
maturation‑arrested dendritic cells that expand regulatory T cells
in vitro and in vivo. Clin Exp Immunol 2010;162:460‑73.
72. Keating GM. Diquafosol ophthalmic solution 3%: A review of its 
use in dry eye. Drugs 2015;75:911‑22.
73. Koh S, Ikeda C, Takai Y, Watanabe H, Maeda N, Nishida K. 
Long‑term results of treatment with diquafosol ophthalmic solution 
for aqueous‑deficient dry eye. Jpn J Ophthalmol 2013;57:440‑6.
74. Kashima T, Itakura H, Akiyama H, Kishi S. Rebamipide ophthalmic 
suspension for the treatment of dry eye syndrome: A critical 
appraisal. Clin Ophthalmol 2014;8:1003‑10.
75. Kinoshita S, Awamura S, Oshiden K, Nakamichi N, Suzuki H, 
Yokoi N. Rebamipide (OPC‑12759) in the treatment of dry eye: 
A randomized, double‑masked, multicenter, placebo‑controlled 
phase II study. Ophthalmology 2012;119:2471‑8.
76. Tajima K, Hattori T, Takahashi H, Katahira H, Narimatsu A, 
Kumakura S, et al. Rebamipide suppresses TNF‑α production 
and macrophage infiltration in the conjunctiva. Vet Ophthalmol 
2018;21:347‑52.
77. Itoh S, Itoh K, Shinohara H. Regulation of human corneal epithelial 
mucins by rebamipide. Curr Eye Res 2014;39:133‑41.
78. Fox RI. Use of cevimeline, a muscarinic M1 and M3 agonist, 
in the treatment of Sjögren’s syndrome. Adv Exp Med Biol 
2002;506:1107‑16.
79. Ono M, Takamura E, Shinozaki K, Tsumura T, Hamano T, Yagi Y, 
et al. Therapeutic effect of cevimeline on dry eye in patients with 
Sjögren’s syndrome: A randomized, double‑blind clinical study. 
Am J Ophthalmol 2004;138:6‑17.
80. Vivino FB, Al‑Hashimi I, Khan Z, LeVeque FG, Salisbury PL 3rd, 
Tran‑Johnson TK, et al. Pilocarpine tablets for the treatment of dry 
mouth and dry eye symptoms in patients with Sjögren syndrome: 
A randomized, placebo‑controlled, fixed‑dose, multicenter trial. 
P92‑01 Study Group. Arch Intern Med 1999;159:174‑81.
81. Wirta D, Vollmer P, Paauw J, Chiu KH, Henry E, Striffler K, et al. 
Efficacy and safety of OC‑01 (Varenicline Solution) nasal spray 
on signs and symptoms of dry eye disease: The ONSET‑2 phase 3 
randomized trial. Ophthalmology 2022;129:379‑87.
82. Kojima T, Higuchi A, Goto E, Matsumoto Y, Dogru M, Tsubota K. 
Autologous serum eye drops for the treatment of dry eye diseases. 
Cornea 2008;27(Suppl 1):S25‑30.
83. Sheppard JD, Torkildsen GL, Geffin JA, Dao J, Evans DG, 
Ousler GW, et al. Characterization of tear production in subjects 
with dry eye disease during intranasal tear neurostimulation: 
Results from two pivotal clinical trials. Ocul Surf 2019;17:142‑50.
84. Ji MH, Moshfeghi DM, Periman L, Kading D, Matossian C, 
Walman G, et al. Novel extranasal tear stimulation: Pivotal study 
results. Transl Vis Sci Technol 2020;9:23.
85. Panigrahi T, Shivakumar S, Shetty R, D’souza S, Nelson EJR, 
Sethu S, et al. Trehalose augments autophagy to mitigate 
stress induced inflammation in human corneal cells. Ocul Surf 
2019;17:699‑713.
86. Mittal R, Patel S, GalorA. Alternative therapies for dry eye disease. 
Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2021;32:348‑61.
87. Diel RJ, Kroeger ZA, Levitt RC, Sarantopoulos C, Sered H, 
Martinez‑Barrizonte J, et al. Botulinum toxin A for the treatment 
April 2023 1347 Donthineni, et al.: Practice patterns of aqueous‑deficient dry eye disease
of photophobia and dry eye. Ophthalmology 2018;125:139‑40.
88. Wang Y, Carreno‑Galeano JT, Singh RB, Dana R, Yin J. Long‑term 
outcomes of punctal cauterization in the management of ocular 
surface diseases. Cornea 2021;40:168‑71.
89. Ervin AM, Law A, Pucker AD. Punctal occlusion for dry eye 
syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;6:Cd006775.
90. KateA, Basu S. Systemic immunosuppression in cornea and ocular 
surface disorders: A ready reckoner for ophthalmologists. Semin 
Ophthalmol 2022;37:330–44.
91. Ruiz‑IrastorzaG, BertsiasG. Treating systemic lupus erythematosus 
in the 21st century: New drugs and new perspectives on old drugs. 
Rheumatology (Oxford) 2020;59(Suppl 5):v69–81.
92. BranisteanuDC, StoleriuG, BranisteanuDE, BodaD, BranisteanuCI, 
Maranduca MA, et al. Ocular cicatricial pemphigoid (Review). Exp 
Ther Med 2020;20:3379‑82.
93. Hingorani M, Lightman S. Ocular cicatricial pemphigoid. Curr 
Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;6:373‑8.
94. Vazirani J, Bhalekar S, Amescua G, Singh S, Basu S. Minor salivary 
gland transplantation for severe dry eye disease due to cicatrising 
conjunctivitis: Multicentre long‑term outcomes of a modified 
technique. Br J Ophthalmol 2021;105:1485‑90.
95. Singh S, Basu S. A novel diagnostic technique of measuring 
labial minor salivary gland secretions using sodium fluorescein 
dye: Implications for patients with dry eyes. Semin Ophthalmol 
2022;37:111‑6.
96. Singh S, Basu S. Functional assessment of transplanted minor 
salivary glands. Cornea 2020;39:e21‑2.
97. Harthan JS, Shorter E. Therapeutic uses of scleral contact lenses for 
ocular surface disease: Patient selection and special considerations. 
Clin Optom (Auckl) 2018;10:65‑74.
98. Dermer H, Lent‑Schochet D, Theotoka D, Paba C, Cheema AA, 
Kim RS, et al. A Review of management strategies for nociceptive 
and neuropathic ocular surface pain. Drugs 2020;80:547‑71.
99. Goyal S, Hamrah P. Understanding neuropathic corneal pain—
gaps and current therapeutic approaches. Semin Ophthalmol 
2016;31:59‑70.
100. Ongun N, Ongun GT. Is gabapentin effective in dry eye disease 
and neuropathic ocular pain? Acta Neurol Belg 2021;121:397‑401.
101. Patel S, Mittal R, Felix ER, Sarantopoulos KD, Levitt RC, Galor A. 
Differential effects of treatment strategies in individuals with 
chronic ocular surface pain with a neuropathic component. Front 
Pharmacol 2021;12:788524.
102. Aggarwal S, Kheirkhah A, Cavalcanti BM, Cruzat A, Colon C, 
Brown E, et al. Autologous serum tears for treatment of 
photoallodynia in patients with corneal neuropathy: Efficacy 
and evaluation with in vivo confocal microscopy. Ocul Surf 
2015;13:250‑62.
103. Cavuoto KM, Banerjee S, Galor A. Relationship between the 
microbiome and ocular health. ocul Surf 2019;17:384‑92.
104. Pflugfelder SC, de Paiva CS. The pathophysiology of dry eye 
disease: What we know and future directions for research. 
Ophthalmology 2017;124:S4‑13.
105. Trujillo‑Vargas CM, Schaefer L, Alam J, Pflugfelder SC, BrittonRA, 
de Paiva CS. The gut‑eye‑lacrimal gland‑microbiome axis in 
Sjögren Syndrome. Ocul Surf 2020;18:335‑44.
106. MendezR, WataneA, Farhangi M, Cavuoto KM, Leith T, Budree S, 
et al. Gut microbial dysbiosis in individuals with Sjögren’s 
syndrome. Microb Cell Fact 2020;19:90.
107. Møller‑HansenM, LarsenAC, ToftPB, Lynggaard CD, SchwartzC, 
Bruunsgaard H, et al. Safety and feasibility of mesenchymal stem 
cell therapy in patients with aqueous deficient dry eye disease. 
Ocul Surf 2021;19:43‑52.
108. Weng J, He C, Lai P, Luo C, Guo R, Wu S, et al. Mesenchymal 
stromal cells treatment attenuates dry eye in patients with chronic 
graft‑versus‑host disease. Mol Ther 2012;20:2347‑54.
109. Kawakita T. Regeneration of lacrimal gland function to maintain 
the health of the ocular surface. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 
2018;59:DES169‑73.
110. Liu CY, Hirayama M, Ali M, Shah D, Aakalu VK. Strategies 
for regenerating the lacrimal gland. Curr Ophthalmol Rep 
2017;5:193‑8.
111. Dietrich J, Schrader S. Towards lacrimal gland regeneration: 
Current concepts and experimental approaches. Curr Eye Res 
2020;45:230‑40.
112. Hirayama M, Tsubota K, Tsuji T. Generation of a bioengineered 
lacrimal gland by using the organ germ method. Methods Mol 
Biol 2017;1597:153‑65.
113. Hayashi R, Okubo T, Kudo Y, Ishikawa Y, Imaizumi T, Suzuki K, 
et al. Generation of 3D lacrimal gland organoids from human 
pluripotent stem cells. Nature 2022;605:126‑31.
