European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
Available online 11 May 2022
0928-0987/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by￾nc-nd/4.0/).
Current trends in pharmaceutical treatment of dry eye disease: A review 
Hebatallah B. Mohamed a,*
, Basma N. Abd El-Hamid b
, Dina Fathalla b
, Ehab A Fouad b 
a Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, South Valley University, Qena 83523, Egypt b Department of Pharmaceutics Faculty of Pharmacy, Assiut University, Assiut 71526, Egypt 
ARTICLE INFO 
Keywords: 
Dry eye disease 
Nanomedicine 
Ocular delivery system 
New treatment 
Ocular devices 
New diagnostic techniques 
ABSTRACT 
Dry eye disease (DED), keratoconjunctivitis sicca or dysfunctional tear syndrome, is the most prevalent 
ophthalmic disease which affects a substantial segment of people worldwide with increasing frequency. It is 
considered a multifactorial disease of the ocular surface and tear film, characterized by a variation of signs and 
symptoms. The symptoms range from mild to severe itching, burning, irritation, eye fatigue, and ocular 
inflammation that may lead to potential damage to the cornea, conjunctiva and even vision loss. Correspond￾ingly, depending on the different manifestations and pathophysiology, the treatment must be tailored specifically 
to each patient by targeting the specific mechanisms implicated in their disease. Currently, there are several 
medical products and techniques available or under investigation for the treatment of DED. The present article 
focused on the pathophysiology of DED, the new diagnostic approach and the recently developed drug delivery 
systems or devices reducing the progress of the disease and treating the causes. 
1. Introduction 
When the eye is unable to produce an adequate amount of tear with 
good quality, "there is a disturbance between tear production, absorp￾tion, and drainage". Or when the eye produces an acceptable amount of 
tear, but this tear is unable to provide good lubrication, protection 
against infection, and assess wound healing of the eye surface, this 
medical condition is known as dry eye disease (DED) (Craig et al., 2017; 
Messmer, 2015; Modis ´ and Szalai, 2011; Perry, 2008; Pflugfelder and de 
Paiva, 2017). DED is a very common ocular condition characterized by 
loss of the tear film homeostasis with an increase in its osmolarity 
(Messmer, 2015; Pflugfelder and de Paiva, 2017). It is defined by In￾ternational Dry Eye Workshop in 2017, as “Dry eye is a multifactorial 
disease of the ocular surface characterized by a loss of homeostasis of the tear 
film, and accompanied by ocular symptoms, in which tear film instability and 
hyperosmolarity, ocular surface inflammation and damage, and neurosen￾sory abnormalities play etiological roles.” (Craig et al., 2017). Approxi￾mately 5–30% of the population have been diagnosed with DED, and the 
prevalence increases significantly with age (Modis ´ and Szalai, 2011). 
Historically, in 1933 DED was reported as a sign related to Sjogren ¨
syndrome, an autoimmune disease that attacks the glands that secrete 
tears and saliva. Then, excessive studies occurred on the ocular surface 
to recognize the real causes of DED since the reported signs of DED were 
detected in a large number of patients who were not suffering from 
Sjogren ¨ syndrome. In 1946 Eugene Wolff proposed that the tear film is 
composed of three layers: outer lipid layer, middle aqueous layer, and 
inner mucin layer, covering corneal epithelial cells. In 1995 National 
Eye Institute stated the first overall definition of DED as a "disorder of the 
tear film due to tear deficiency or excessive evaporation” (Dunn et al., 
2021). In 2017 the International Dry Eye Workshop (DEWS II) refined 
the definition of DED to include a loss of homeostasis and neurosensory 
abnormalities. The treatment strategy of DED was based on the 
compensation for loss of tear, so artificial tears containing buffer and 
viscolizer were used. Nowadays, with the development of DED diag￾nosing techniques, tear structure is found to contain proteins and fatty 
materials. So, the treatment policy is changed not only to compensate for 
the decreased part in tear composition but also to stimulate the secretion 
of this part and treat the underline causes of DED. This review highlights 
the etiologies, the pathophysiology of DED, and the role of diagnostic 
techniques in the policy of treatment. 
2. Anatomical and physiological overview 
The tear film is a complex structure produced by the lacrimal func￾tional unit (LFU). LFU is an integrated system that includes the lacrimal 
glands, ocular surface (cornea and conjunctiva), meibomian glands, 
eyelids, and net of nerves connect them (Aragona et al., 2013; Craig 
et al., 2017). The normal tear film forms a layer, approximately three μm 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: dochoba2014@svu.edu.eg (H.B. Mohamed). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ejps 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejps.2022.106206 
Received 7 March 2022; Received in revised form 5 May 2022; Accepted 9 May 2022 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
2
thick and a three µl volume, located on the anterior conjunctival surface. 
The main three components of this film are: the outermost lipid layer 
secreted by the meibomian glands, the intermediate aqueous layer 
secreted by lacrimal glands, and the innermost mucin layer secreted by 
conjunctival goblet cells (Akpek et al., 2019; Modis ´ and Szalai, 2011) 
(Table 1). Recently, this tear film is described as a complex blend of 
two-layer structures: the outer lipid layer and a muco-aqueous layer 
(Dunn et al., 2021) (Fig. 1). 
This film has different functions, including lubrication, maintenance 
of corneal transparency with the smooth optical surface, antimicrobial 
protection, nutrition, wound healing of the ocular surface, and removal 
of any foreign body (Akpek et al., 2019; Messmer, 2015; Perry, 2008). 
Typically, the spontaneous blink (5–10 blinks/second) spreads the tear 
film over the ocular surface and the excess fluid drains into the nose 
through the tear ducts. This process is regulated centrally by the brain to 
maintain the good optical quality of the eye (Porola et al., 2007; Wilson, 
2003). 
3. Pathophysiology 
DED is a multifactorial disorder including several interacting 
mechanisms. The LFU is worked as a tightly integrated unit (Azcarate 
et al., 2014). Any disease or environmental factors disrupt the function 
of this unit, causing a disturbance in the tear film by changing its volume 
or composition will lead to loss of ocular surface homeostasis. Normally, 
the stimulation of nerve endings in the cornea and nasal passages sends 
impulses to the central nervous system that regulates tear-producing and 
blinking. Through blinking processes, gentle squeezing occurred to 
meibomian glands to produce lipids that spread over the ocular surface, 
forming the lipid layer of the tear film. Also, stimulating the nerve end 
encourages the lachrymal gland to produce the watery part of the tear 
film. Finally, the goblet cells in the conjunctiva and ocular surface are 
accelerated to create a mucin layer (Dunn et al., 2021; Modis ´ and Szalai, 
2011). Ocular inflammation and hyperosmolarity of tear film are 
considered the hallmarks of this disease. This hyperosmolarity triggers 
the production of inflammatory mediators (e.g., interleukin 1, tumor 
necrosis factor-α) into the ocular surface that damage each of the ocular 
epithelial and the goblet cells leading to disturbance in the tear film and 
then DED exists (Dunn et al., 2021; Garrigue et al., 2017; Pflugfelder and 
de Paiva, 2017). However, it is unclear whether this hyperosmolarity of 
the tear film arises early in the course of the DED or if it is a manifes￾tation of tear film dysfunction. 
Usually, the osmolarity of the tear film is 296–302 mOsm/L; how￾ever, in cases with DED, this rate rises to 316–360 mOsm/L. Several 
studies performed in animal models and humans have found that the 
application of hyperosmolar slain to the ocular surface initiates a sec￾ondary immune response that can lead to a direct pro-inflammatory 
effect on the ocular surface epithelium. It has been shown to activate 
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs); stimulate the secretion of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., interleukin [IL]-1b, TNF-a, and IL-6), 
Table 1 
The composition of the tear film′
s layers. 
Type of layer Origin Major components Function References 
The outermost 
(lipid layer) 
- Meibomian glands on 
the eyelid. 
- Zeis and Moll glands. 
Combination of low polarity lipids (e.g., wax and 
cholesterol esters) and high polarity lipids (e.g., 
triglycerides, free fatty acids, and phospholipids). 
- Preventing evaporation of the tear film 
between blinks. 
- Enhancing tear film spreading. 
- Providing a smooth optical surface. 
(Craig et al., 2017) 
The middle 
(aqueous 
layer) 
- Lacrimal gland (above 
the lateral end of the 
eye). 
Represents the bulk of the precorneal tear film. 
- Water and electrolytes. 
- Antibacterial proteins (e.g., lysozyme, lactoferrin, and 
immunoglobulins). 
- Vitamins (vitamin A). 
- Growth factors. 
- Wettability to the ocular surface. 
- Carrying oxygen and nutrients to the 
cornea. 
- Protecting against infections. 
- Promoting wound healing. 
(Akpek et al., 2019; 
Modis ´ and Szalai, 
2011) 
The innermost 
(mucin layer) 
- Conjunctival goblet 
cells. 
- Ocular surface 
epithelium. 
- High molecular weight glycoproteins are called mucins. - Lubricating the ocular surface. 
- Providing an adsorbent interface between 
the aqueous layer and the hydrophobic 
ocular epithelium surface. 
(Dunn et al., 2021) 
Fig. 1. Tear film structure: lipid (oil), aqueous (water), and mucous layers. 
Each layer owns a different content which dictates its function. These layers 
work together to maintain the health of our eyes and prevent infection. 
Table 2 
Some factors lead to dysfunction in the lacrimal fluid unit. 
Medical condition Examples 
Aging Older age and female gender (McCarty et al., 1998; 
Pflugfelder, 2004). 
Decrease in supportive 
factors 
Decrease androgen hormone (Azcarate et al., 2014). 
Ocular disease Keratitis, blepharitis, and allergic eye disease (Akpek 
et al., 2019; Leonardi et al., 2017). 
Systemic condition - Rheumatoid arthritis (McCarty et al., 1998; Moss et al., 
2000). 
- Autoimmune thyroid disease (Bacman et al., 2001). 
- Sjӧgren syndrome (Akpek et al., 2019). 
Medications Antihistamines, antidepressants, antianxiety, 
anticholinergics, diuretics, oral corticosteroids (Bacman 
et al., 2001; Moss et al., 2000; Rolando et al., 2018), and 
hormonal replacement therapy (ex. estrogen) (Rolando 
et al., 2018; Schaumberg et al., 2001). 
Loss in corneal nerve 
sensitivity 
- Contact lens use (Craig et al., 2017). 
- Chronic diabetes causes nerve damage (Zhang et al., 
2016). 
- Laser eye surgery may cause nerve damage (Bacman 
et al., 2001). 
Other conditions - Extensive desk work (Uchino et al., 2008). 
- Prolonged use of eye drops containing preservatives ( 
Leung et al., 2008; Rossi et al., 2009). 
- Smoking (Bacman et al., 2001). 
- Reduced humidity and increased wind (Bacman et al., 
2001). 
- Deficiency of vitamin A or omega-3 (Aragona et al., 
2013). 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
3
chemokines, and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-3 and MMP-9); and 
induce apoptosis (Guzman ´ et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2009; Luo et al., 2005). 
Several clinical researchers observed that the inflammation in the 
ocular surface, meibomian glands, Lacrimal gland, autoimmune disease 
or systemic inflammation, and dysfunction develop with age play a great 
role in the pathogenesis of DED (Barabino et al., 2005; Ciprandi et al., 
1994; Rolando et al., 2018; Rolando et al., 1990; Stern et al., 1998; Wei 
and Asbell, 2014). Other factors, Table 2, lead to the development of 
LFU dysfunction and then DED were reported (Pflugfelder et al., 2000; 
Stern et al., 1998). Generally, if the case is left untreated, the corneal 
ulcer may develop in this case and a loss of vision will exist (Dunn et al., 
2021). 
4. Etiology and classification 
DED is classified according to the causes: "The aqueous-deficient 
type" with reduced tear production and "The hyper-evaporative type" 
with increased tear film evaporation (Craig et al., 2017; Messmer, 2015; 
Modis ´ and Szalai, 2011; Pflugfelder and de Paiva, 2017; Rolando et al., 
2018). Mixed cases between the two types can be occurred e.g., in the 
case of Sjogren ¨ syndrome, the autoimmune inflammation of lacrimal 
glands leads to a decrease in the secretion of the aqueous part, followed 
by inflammation in the meibomian glands that leads to insufficient 
production of lipid in the tear film. This disturbance in the tear film 
resulted from numerous factors (Modis ´ and Szalai, 2011), including 
androgen hormone changes, systemic autoimmune disease, inflamed 
meibomian glands, or allergic eye disease, Fig. 2. Both types make film 
composition hyper-osmotic due to an increase in the concentration of 
Fig. 2. The classification of dry eye disease according to causes into two basic types: aqueous-deficiency and hyper-evaporative types. These two types result from 
numerous pathways leading to a loss of the tear film homeostasis. 
Table 3 
Diagnostic tests for dry eye disease. 
Diagnostic tests Management 
Patient history - Symptom-oriented questionnaire. 
Physical 
examination 
- Measurement of visual disturbance. 
Slit-lamp 
examination 
- The eyelid margins (Lid congruity and lid closure). 
- Temporal lid-parallel conjunctival folds (LIPCOFs). 
- The meibomian gland orifices. 
- Ocular surface (staining with fluorescein/lissamine green) ( 
Macri et al., 2000). 
- Tear film break-up time (Tear film stability) with 
fluorescein drops (Less than ten seconds considered 
abnormal). 
The Schirmer test - Aqueous tear production (ten mm on the test strip or less 
considered abnormal)(Aaron et al., 2005). 
laboratory 
measurements 
- Tear film (osmolarity, lysozyme level, lactoferrin level, 
glycoprotein content, and immunoglobulin content) (Lemp 
et al., 2011; Messmer et al., 2010). 
- The Oculus Keratograph (non-invasive tear-film break-up 
time) (Gulati and Jain, 2017). 
- LipiView uses interferometry to quantitatively evaluate 
tear-film lipid layer thickness(Gulati and Jain, 2017). 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
4
solutes in the tear film, which stimulates the release of inflammatory 
mediators into the tears and damages the ocular surface over time. Also, 
this inflammation leads to the loss of goblet cells and reduces mucin 
production, which finally contributes to the tearing film instability 
(Perry, 2008; Pflugfelder and de Paiva, 2017; Wei and Asbell, 2014). 
5. Diagnosis of DED using subjective and objective signs 
The two types of DED have the same symptoms. Patients typically 
feel painful eyes, a grittiness or sandy sensation in both eyes, leading to 
redness, itching, burning, and a scratchy sensation. Watery eyes develop 
as a body responds to the eyes’ irritation. These symptoms progress over 
time to photophobia with corneal complications (ulceration and even 
corneal perforation), and then, finally, loss of vision may occur (Craig 
et al., 2017; Messmer, 2015; Modis ´ and Szalai, 2011; Perry, 2008; 
Pflugfelder and de Paiva, 2017). Both types of DED appear similar in 
symptoms to infectious or allergic eye diseases (Akpek et al., 2019; 
Kojima et al., 2020; Messmer, 2015; Perry, 2008). The diagnostic tests in 
addition to physical examination are necessary to differentiate between 
them (Table 3). If a patient with DED is incorrectly diagnosed and pre￾scribed epitheliotoxic antibiotics or antiallergic drugs, DED may worsen 
(Messmer, 2015). 
Diagnosis of DED is mainly based on the review of symptoms and 
patient history. That summarized the medical and ocular history, 
including ocular surgery, and past or current use of systemic and ocular 
medications for conditions such as DED, blepharitis, and allergies. Then 
preliminary assessments of the patient’s visual acuity are performed by a 
physician through physical examination as a blurred or intermittent 
distortion of vision is observed in patients with DED. After that, the tear 
film osmolarity and the ocular inflammation were estimated then the 
tear volume was measured by a Schirmer strip test. Next to that, the 
primary assessments were occurred using a slit-lamp examination to 
detect eyelids abnormalities, alteration or inflammation of the orifices of 
the meibomian glands. Also, a slit-lamp can be used to visualized any 
damage to the ocular surface after the application of dye and determined 
the tear break-up time (TBUT), the time required for the appearance of 
the first patch in the continuity tear film after the last blink of a patient, 
wherein the case of DED the patient has a rapid TBUT (<10 s). Addi￾tional diagnostic tests such as LipiView and the Oculus Keratograph are 
used to quantitatively evaluate tear-film lipid layer thickness and for 
evaluating patients suffering from a distortion of vision respectively. 
The patient history, physical examination, and diagnostic tests 
should be performed to assess DED in general, but the determination of 
the type of DED is a very important step to choose the correct specialized 
treatments for each case, Table 4 (Kojima et al., 2020). The aqueous 
deficiency type of DED, that characterized by a decrease in the amount 
of the major aqueous component of the tear film through lowering in the 
secretions of the lacrimal gland, can be diagnosed by a reduction in the 
Schirmer score test to less than 10 mm on the test strip, a decreased tear 
meniscus, and the ocular staining pattern showing a keratoconjunctivitis 
sicca. Further, the hyper-evaporative type of DED, that characterized by 
a deficiency in the outer lipid component of the tear film via meibomian 
gland dysfunction, can be observed by interferometry and meibography, 
assess any changes in the lipids component of the tear film, and also by 
an intensive investigation of the eye lid margins and meibomian glands. 
Otherwise, if there are any deficiencies in a goblet cell or mucin that 
affects the stability of the tear film that is detected through lowering in 
TBUT (<10 s) and ocular surface damage that is evaluated by in-vivo 
confocal microscopy. 
Table 4 
Differential diagnoses for types of dry eye disease. 
Aqueous-deficient 
dry eye 
Hyper-evaporative dry eye Both forms 
- Reduced tear 
meniscus. 
- Reduced 
LIPCOFs. 
- Low Schirmer 
test. 
- Pathological changes to the 
lid margins. 
- Obstructed meibomian gland 
orifices. 
- Thickened meibomian gland 
secretion. 
- Tear film break-up time is 
reduced. 
- Ocular surface damage. 
- Elevated tear film 
osmolarity. 
Fig. 3. The management logarithm of dry eye disease; DED is a multi-factorial disease; therefore a proper diagnostic approach must decide the important factors 
from the patient’s clinical standpoint. So a personalized, effective, and long-term treatment can be administered and altered if necessary. 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
5
6. Management of DED 
DED greatly impacts the patient′
s life through everyday activities 
like driving, reading, and using devices containing monitors as the pa￾tient complains of uncomfortable and visual instability. Also, over time 
the untreated DED undergoes serious complications (eye inflammation, 
corneal ulcers, and vision loss) that become more difficult to get under 
control. The management of DED (Fig. 3) aims to reduce each of the 
subjective and objective manifestations on the ocular surface to restore a 
good quality of life (Modis ´ and Szalai, 2011). Scientists do all their best 
to find a solution to this complicated situation of DED. Generally, the 
DED is believed as a non-curable condition that needs chronic therapy to 
re-establish and maintain the ocular surface system homeostasis. Taking 
into consideration that diseases such as diabetes, thyroid problems, 
systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren ¨ ’s syn￾drome, and blepharitis usually aggravate symptoms of DED (Javadi and 
Feizi, 2011). Patient education is an important step for the successful 
management of DED. Ophthalmologists should educate the patients 
about the fact that DED is a chronic disease that needs long-term 
treatment. The treatment of DED can be either “aqueous-deficient” or 
“hyper-evaporative.” based on the severity of the disease, Fig 4 (Modis ´
and Szalai, 2011). 
6.1. Conservative treatment 
6.1.1. Tear substitution 
6.1.1.1. Artificial tears. Artificial tears are topical eye formulations used 
to lubricate dry eyes and help in maintaining the moisture on the outer 
surface of the eyes. They are used traditionally in all stages of DED 
treatment as a first-line therapy to improve symptoms. However, it is not 
specifically designed to improve symptoms, but to prevent their build￾up. Artificial tears are classified according to US Food and Drug 
Administration FDA into two categories:(Pucker et al., 2016) (1) 
demulcent agents which are water-soluble polymers applied directly to 
the ocular surface, and (2) emollient agents which is a fat or oil applied 
externally on eyelids or oil in water emulsion eye drops. These two 
categories aim to protect and lubricate mucous membrane and prevent 
drying and cracking respectively. 
In addition to the above function, they replenish the deficiency of the 
components of the tear film, wettability, and spreading. Also, artificial 
tears reduce the osmolarity of the ocular surface through dilution of the 
inflammatory cytokines and lower the susceptibility of the ocular sur￾face to inflammation (Aragona et al., 2021). The approved components 
of artificial tears by the FDA and their function are depicted in Table 5. 
On the other hand, other classes of pharmaceutical excipients and 
food additives were reported to provide therapeutic improvement in 
DED, but these items are not listed in the FDA monograph as active 
therapeutic ingredients for the treatment of DED as it needs numerous 
clinical studies with a huge cost. So, the manufacturers list them as 
inactive ingredients used in artificial tears to avoid these trials. Exam￾ples of these agents are (Kathuria et al., 2021): 
- Osmoprotectants: Agents help in protecting the ocular cells from 
injury by hyperosmolarity within DED e.g., trehalose, erythritol, 
levocarnitine. 
Fig. 4. Symptoms development and treatment of DED: treatment recommended options according to the progress of the symptoms of the disease. 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
6
- Humectants: Hygroscopic agents that encourage the retention of 
water on the ocular surface e.g., sodium hyaluronate. 
- Hydroxypropyl Guar gum: A viscous protein-polymer used as a soft 
gel to increase the viscosity of the tear, therefore, increasing the 
retention time of the aqueous layer to the mucins. 
- Oils: oils used to mimic the lipid layer of the tear film (e.g., flaxseed 
oil, castor oil, mineral oil). 
The artificial tears exist as units preserved (multidose) or united non￾preserved (single dose) preparations. Benzalkonium chloride, chlor￾obutanol, and cetrimide are usually used as preservatives in multidose 
artificial tears. The non-preserved type is preferred for use when the 
patient needs four times daily administrations. This recommendation is 
attributed to the aggravation of symptoms by disruption of the ocular 
epithelial cell-cell junction and inducing toxic epitheliopathy in case of 
long-lasting application of preserved products (Javadi and Feizi, 2011). 
6.1.1.2. Autologous serum. Tears may also be substituted with naturally 
occurring biologic fluids, such as serum (autologous serum tears), which 
are prepared from the patients’ blood. It includes many components e.g., 
growth factors, immunoglobulins, vitamin A, enzymes, and proteins like 
albumin and lactoferrin. Although the use of autologous serum has 
disadvantages such as the possibility of contamination, denaturation of 
the component by time, and the need to blood sample collection from 
the patient for each preparation time, it is showing a beneficial effect on 
advanced and severe cases of DED (Akpek et al., 2019; Kojima et al., 
2020; Milner et al., 2017). 
6.1.2. Anti-inflammatory agents 
In the moderate to severe cases of DED, using anti-inflammatory 
drugs is required. With environmental stress and physiologic changes 
with aging, inflammation of the ocular surface usually occurred. Also, 
this ocular manifestation may be caused by systemic inflammatory 
conditions (Kojima et al., 2020; Modis ´ and Szalai, 2011). The inflam￾mation of the ocular surface and the secretory components of the 
lacrimal system (the lacrimal gland and/or lacrimal ducts) consider the 
core features of DED pathogenesis. This inflammation affects greatly the 
amount and the composition of produced tears causing tear deficiency 
and usually building up over time causing severe chronic cases (Milner 
et al., 2017). Therefore, controlling inflammation is a critical step to 
prevent and treat chronic DED (Aragona et al., 2021). 
6.1.2.1. Cyclosporine. Cyclosporine A (CsA) is a fungus-derived peptide, 
which has anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive properties by 
preventing T-cell activation and inflammatory cytokines production. 
Cyclosporine A (0.05%) topically eye drop was approved by FDA for use 
twice daily as targeting to treat ocular surface inflammation in DED 
(Hessen and Akpek, 2014; Milner et al., 2017; Sall et al., 2000). The 
application of topical cyclosporine A (0.05%) improves the Schirmer test 
value, corneal fluorescein staining, and increases goblet cell density. So 
that, it alleviates the signs and symptoms of DED in about 50% of pa￾tients, although, the application of this drug is usually associated with 
eye irritation (Aragona et al., 2021; Modis ´ and Szalai, 2011). The 
combined use of steroid eye drops may be beneficial to decrease the side 
effect of CsA (Sheppard et al., 2014). 
6.1.3. Corticosteroids 
In moderate to severe dry eye disease, using corticosteroid topically 
as unpreserved eye drops over 2 to 4 weeks e.g., 0.1% fluorometholone 2 
to 4 times/day for two-four weeks or hydrocortisone showing great 
improvement in the symptoms and clinical signs. By long-term therapy, 
the corticosteroids’ side effects will appear (cataract formation and 
elevated intraocular pressure) (Marsh and Pflugfelder, 1999), so this 
type of treatment is recommended only for short-term therapy 
(Messmer, 2015; Modis ´ and Szalai, 2011). Hydrocortisone is recom￾mended to be used safely for a patient with severe DED; however, the 
occurrence of complications is still possible. In the case of systemic in￾flammatory disease or autoimmune disorders (e.g., Sjogren ¨ syndrome) 
using corticosteroids systemically in a short pulse (e.g., 40 mg on 
alternate days) is recommended but under control. Generally, using 
topical or systemic corticosteroids improve both subjective and objec￾tive signs and symptom but they should be used under the monitoring of 
specialists. 
6.1.4. Rebamipide 
However, rebamipide is an oral drug used for the treatment of gastric 
ulcers; it has been shown to increase the amount of mucin-like sub￾stances and the number of conjunctival goblet cells on the ocular sur￾face. In addition, it has anti-inflammatory action by suppressing T cell 
activation and cytokine production, so it has been indicated as oral 
mucin secretagogues in DED management (Tandon et al., 2012). 
6.1.5. Lactoferrin 
Lactoferrin secreted by the lacrimal gland into tears provides a 
protective effect to ocular cells against cell death by oxidative ultraviolet 
Table 5 
Artificial tears components as approved by FDA. 
Component Specific use Concentration Notes 
Carboxymethylcellulose 
sodium 
Demulcents 0.2 to 2.5% 
Hydroxyethylcellulose Demulcents 0.2 to 2.5% 
Hydroxypropyl 
methylcellulose 
Demulcents 0.2 to 2.5% 
Methylcellulose Demulcents 0.2 to 2.5% 
Dextran 70 Demulcents 0.1% used with another 
polymeric 
demulcent agent. 
Gelatin Demulcents 0.01% 
Glycerin Demulcents 0.2 to 1% 
Polyethylene glycol 300 Demulcents 0.2 to 1% 
Polyethylene glycol 400 Demulcents 0.2 to 1% 
Polysorbate 80 Demulcents 0.2 to 1% 
Propylene glycol Demulcents 0.2 to 1% 
Anhydrous lanolin Emollients 1 to 10% Used in 
combination with 
one or more 
oleaginous 
emollient agents. 
Lanolin Emollients 1 to 10% Used in 
combination with 
one or more 
oleaginous 
emollient agents. 
Polyvinyl alcohol Demulcents 0.1 to 4% 
Povidone Demulcents 0.1 to 2% 
Light mineral oil Oleaginous 
Emollients 
up to 50% Used in 
combination with 
one or more 
emollient agents. 
Mineral oil Oleaginous 
Emollients 
up to 50% Used in 
combination with 
one or more 
emollient agents. 
Paraffin Oleaginous 
Emollients 
up to 5% Used in 
combination with 
one or more 
emollient agents. 
Petrolatum up to 100% 
White ointment up to 100% 
White petrolatum up to 100% 
White wax up to 5% Used in 
combination with 
one or more 
emollient agents. 
Yellow wax up to 5% Used in 
combination with 
one or more 
emollient agents. 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
7
stress and inhibits the production of various cytokines, so it suppresses 
the eye inflammation of DED. Lactoferrin is used orally as an enteric￾coated tablet (270 mg/day) for one month to treat DED. A significant 
improvement in symptoms was observed. 
6.1.6. Fatty acid supplements 
Omega-3 and omega-6 are polyunsaturated essential fatty acids 
absorbed from food. Both of them are included in all body cell mem￾branes, however, omega-3 competes with omega-6 for inclusion ac￾cording to their dietary intake (Kathuria et al., 2021; Vickers and Gupta, 
2015). Arachidonic acid which is one of the omega-6 fatty acids com￾ponents is transformed into pro-inflammatory mediators, once the cells 
are activated by external stimuli. This mediator decreased when omega-3 
displaces omega-6 as a result of increasing omega-3 intake. This is the 
main anti-inflammatory mechanism of omega-3(Garrigue et al., 2017; 
Surette, 2008). In a recent study, researchers found a relation between the 
ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 and tear film stability whereby increasing 
this ratio the symptoms of DED are exaggerated. Further, they found that 
the signs and symptoms of DED improved with increased omega-3 dietary 
supplement intake (Kangari et al., 2013; Liu and Ji, 2014). Omega-3 fatty 
acids (eicosapentaenoic acid, docosahexaenoic acid, and a-linolenic acid) 
are recommended as a 500 mg/day oral dose for patients with dry eye 
disease associated with systemic autoimmune inflammatory disorders, 
but increasing omega-3 fatty acid intake may increase the risk of prostate 
cancer (Rashid et al., 2008). Recently, to overcome this problem, the 
omega-3 fatty acid is applied topically as an eye drop. It has the potential 
benefit to improve ocular inflammation in DED but is still currently under 
investigation (Rashid et al., 2008). 
6.1.7. Tetracyclines and their derivatives 
Tetracycline and its derivatives Doxycycline and Minocycline have 
anti-inflammatory, as well as bacteriostatic effects. They act by lowering 
the production of interleukin-1 (IL-1α) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF- 
α) and lowering the activity of several matrix metalloproteinases, 
collagenase, and phospholipase A2. They have been used successfully in 
the treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction and corneal ulceration in 
small oral doses (40 - 400 mg/day for doxycycline and between 50 - 100 
mg/day for minocycline), however, in large doses skin and gastroin￾testinal tract side effects appear (Javadi and Feizi, 2011; Messmer, 
2015). Several studies using experimental DED models demonstrated 
that the use of these drugs in small doses for 6 to 12 weeks improves 
corneal surface regularity, tear production, and tear film stability (De 
Paiva et al., 2006a, 2006b). 
6.1.8. Macrolides 
In general, antibiotics play important role in the management of 
DED, especially when bacterial meibomian glands infection is the 
causative agent of DED. Azithromycin is one of the macrolides that have 
anti-inflammatory and antibacterial effects. Several studies reported 
that the use of 1% azithromycin eye drops for the treatment of ble￾pharitis and meibomian gland dysfunction improved the lipid layer 
secretion and tear film stability(Foulks et al., 2010; Haque et al., 2010). 
6.2. Topical mucin secretagogues 
Secretagogues are agents that stimulate mucin secretion as a mech￾anism of action. Topical secretagogue formulations are a novel treat￾ment that is applied to the ocular surface to induce aqueous and/or 
mucin secretion. They are available internationally and used for the 
treatment of DED in Japan and South Korea but are not currently 
available in the United States. This drug is a P2Y2 purinergic receptor 
agonist that stimulates the receptors in ocular tissues as stimulates 
conjunctival epithelial cells for water secretion (e.g., diquafosol tetra￾sodium 3% ophthalmic solution) and conjunctival goblet cells for mucin 
secretion (diquafosol tetrasodium 3% ophthalmic solution and 2% 
rebamipide ophthalmic suspension). They have a beneficial effect on 
Table 6 
New devices used in the treatment of DED. 
Name of device Definition Advantages Disadvantages Availability References 
Intranasal tear neuro￾stimulator 
It applies small electrical currents to 
stimulate the mucosal nerves ending 
that increases natural tear production 
through a process named (the 
nasolacrimal reflex pathway of the 
lacrimal function unit). 
- Use the device four times /day 
for 180 days (Schirmer scores 
were significantly higher, 
improvement of ocular 
symptoms). 
- Most useful in patients with 
aqueous tear deficiency. 
- Nasal (pain, burning, 
congestion), facial pain, and 
headache. 
- Not to be used in case of 
patients having cardiac 
pacemakers, implanted 
metallic or electronic devices 
in the head or neck. 
- A highly costive technique. 
Approved by 
FDA 
(Gumus et al., 2017; 
Yu et al., 2021) 
Extranasal tear neuro￾stimulator 
It stimulates the external nasal nerve by 
applying small electrical currents 
superficially on the skin of the nose at 
the junction between the nasal cartilage 
and nasal bone. 
Significant improvement in the 
mean of Schirmer score after 
using the device for 30 seconds 
at a time at least twice daily for 
30 days. 
• No reported adverse events. Approved by 
FDA 
(Yu et al., 2021) 
Scleral Lenses - These are lenses applied to the sclera; 
they should not touch the corneal 
surface. They act as a fluid-filled 
reservoir. 
- They are used for patients with the 
irregular corneal surface. 
- Significantly improve DED 
signs and symptoms. 
The lengthy and costly fitting 
process. 
Available 
(Since 2013) 
(Nguyen et al., 2018; 
Romero-Rangel 
et al., 2000) 
Amniotic Membrane - It is a basement membrane substitute 
or temporary graft coverage of the 
epithelium to allow healing. 
- It has anti-inflammatory and anti￾scarring effects. 
- It contains growth factors that impart 
anti-inflammatory properties. 
- Promoting epithelial wound 
healing on the eye surface. 
- Recommended for severe 
indications that require longer 
treatment. 
- Significant decrease in 
symptoms after treatment 
duration of five days. 
- Costly process. 
- Pain and inflammation of lid 
or/and conjunctiva from 
symblepharon ring. 
Currently 
available 
(Cheng et al., 2016; 
McDonald et al., 
2018) 
Aero Pump’s med spray It is a new ophthalmic drug delivery 
device that can be applied micro-and 
nanotechnology-based ocular 
formulation from a close distance 
directly onto the open eye, without 
causing a blink reflex. 
- Administered easily without 
the need to tilt the head back. 
- Used for numerous 
commercially ophthalmic 
products for DED (Low and 
high viscosity products). 
Currently 
available 
(Kraus, 2020) 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
8
stabilizing the tear film and repairing the corneal epithelial damage 
(Jones et al., 2017; Kojima et al., 2020; Li et al., 2019; Milner et al., 
2017). Increased tear secretion by using secretagogues agents can be 
achieved by a local or systemic application. 
The most used eye drops as artificial tears are 0.1% and 0.3% sodium 
hyaluronate ophthalmic solution. It has been reported that the combi￾nation of sodium hyaluronate and diquafosol sodium as an aqueous 
secretagogue, increases the retention time of water secreted by diqua￾fosol. Therefore increase the wettability time of the ocular surface and 
the therapeutic effect of diquafosol drug (Kamiya et al., 2012). Finally, 
most secretagogues agents are still under investigation (Kojima et al., 
2020; Milner et al., 2017; Modis ´ and Szalai, 2011). 
7. New treatments used for the management of DED 
Recently, the developed techniques used to investigate and diagnose 
the different types as well as stages of DED help in the decision of the 
suitable treatment protocol. Up till now lubricant eye drops or ointments 
to overcome the symptoms of DED are the mainstay treatment, however, 
they cannot relieve the underline causes of DED. There are new pro￾cedures, devices, and topical medications introduced into the field of 
DED treatment, where some of them are under investigation or in early 
clinical trials (Akpek et al., 2019; Kojima et al., 2020; O’Neil et al., 
2019). 
Nowadays, there are numerous devices for the treatment of DED. 
Some of these devices are useful for patients with aqueous tear defi￾ciency as intra or extra nasal neurostimulators whereas scleral lenses can 
be used as a fluid-filled reservoir for a patient with an irregular corneal 
surface. Also, the amniotic membrane is prescribed for various ocular 
surface disorders and can be used for the DED as it has anti￾inflammatory and restorative properties. Recently, Aero Pumpʼs med 
spray is considered an alternative device to eye droppers that can be 
applied an ophthalmic medication from a close distance onto an open 
eye as an ultra-soft, slow-moving fine mist without causing a blink reflex 
by using a micro-nanotechnology-based spray nozzle. The new open-eye 
spray offers a propellant and preservative-free multi-dose spray device. 
On the other hand, there has been increasing attention to the study of 
several processes for the treatment of DED. For example, using thermal 
or mechanical energy via Intense Pulsed Light and Vectored Thermal 
Pulsation to express glands and re-establish the normal flow of meibum. 
Moreover, using the Meibomian Gland Probing technique by applying a 
solid stainless steel probe directly into meibomian gland orifices pro￾vides a faster improvement in all DED measurements. The following 
Tables 6 and 7 summarize the recently developed devices, and treatment 
processes of DED respectively. 
Despite a good understanding of the DED pathogenesis and the 
presence of different types of treatment strategies, DED is still incom￾pletely treated. Several challenges in the management of DED are still 
present. Using eye lubricants is still considered an important step in DED 
management. However, they only relieve the symptoms and do not in￾fluence the real causes of DED. Furthermore, the chronic use of preser￾vative lubricant formulations can lead to damaging effects on the ocular 
surface so preservative-free artificial tears are needed for long term 
therapy (Jones et al., 2017). Moreover, using topical corticosteroids for 
a long time will lead to several problems, containing opportunistic in￾fections and cataracts (Jones et al., 2017). 
New alternative therapies are needed to be developed. Table 8 
summarizes the recently developed therapies for the treatment of DED 
that may particularly impact in the future, they are classified as: 
- A mucin-like glycoprotein group e.g., Lacritin and Lubricin 
They present naturally as a lubricant on the ocular surface and 
protects the ocular surface against shear forces of physiological eyelid 
blinks. Therefore, lowering the production of lubricin and/or lacritin 
elevates the shear stress at the ocular surface, which may cause 
inflammation and build-up of inflammatory mediators (e.g., IL-1α, IL-6, 
TNF-α) and proteases (e.g., MMP-9) in the tear film. So the adminis￾tration of Lacritin and/or Lubricin locally as eye drops will improve both 
signs and symptoms of DED. 
- Mucin secretagogues e.g., Rebamipide, Diquafosol, Sulglycotide, 
Tavilermide, Gefarnate, Ecabet sodium, Mycophenolate mofetil, and 
15(s)-HETE (Icomucret). 
Mucins are heavy glycoproteins, classified as gel-forming mucins 
(MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B, MUC6, and MUC19) and soluble mucins 
(MUC7 and MUC9). The most important gel-forming mucin is MUC5AC 
which is secreted by the conjunctival goblet cells into the tear fluid 
however MUC7 is the greatest significant soluble mucin obtained from 
the acinar cells of the lacrimal glands. Mucins play significant roles on 
the ocular surface (e.g., lubrication of the ocular surface, maintenance of 
lacrimal fluid, and barrier against pathogens) (Hori, 2018). In DED, the 
conjunctival goblet cells and mucin secretion are decreased. 
Recently, the treatment strategies of DED are based on the stimula￾tion of tears production rather than tear substitution. The stimulation of 
lacrimal glands chemically to produce aqueous tears using neuro￾stimulator drugs is still under investigation. On the other hand, 
several drugs act as mucin secretagogues, increase the secretion of 
mucin from conjunctival goblet cells and/or increase the goblet cell 
Table 7 
New process used for the treatment of DED. 
Name of 
process 
Definition Advantages Disadvantages Availability References 
Intense pulsed 
light (IPL) 
This technique is used for the hyper￾evaporative type of DED by applying 
infrared light that is converted to 
destructive heat upon absorption. 
- Reducing inflammation and 
bacterial growth on the 
eyelid. 
- Melting the viscous lipid in 
meibomian glands to improve 
the flow. 
- Localizing redness and 
swelling. 
- There are no 
significant adverse 
effects. 
FDA-approved for 
dermatological treatment and 
used recently for DED as off￾label. 
(Dell et al., 2017; 
Gupta et al., 2016) 
Vectored 
Thermal 
Pulsation 
- The applied heat and therapeutic 
pressure on both eyelids. 
- Preferred in the treatment of DED 
with a defect in meibomian gland 
dysfunction. 
- Improving both signs and 
symptoms of DED. 
- The single treatment effects 
lasting six to nine months. 
- Minimal side effects 
were noted as eyelid 
discomfort only. 
- The device is 
expensive. 
A clinical trial is needed to 
become available. 
(Blackie et al., 2016; 
Hagen et al., 2018) 
Meibomian 
Gland 
Probing 
The applied stainless steel probe 
directly into the meibomian gland 
orifices to open the closed orifice. 
- The significantly faster 
improvement lasted for 11.5 
months. 
- It an application for the 
patient’s suffering from DED 
with meibomian glands 
dysfunction 
- Need skill and 
experience. 
Numerous placebo-controlled 
trials are needed. 
(Magno et al., 2021; 
Maskin and Testa, 
2018; Syed and 
Sutula, 2017) 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
9
Table 8 
New topical eye therapies used in the treatment of DED. 
Therapies Class Functions Stage of clinical 
trials 
References 
A mucin-like glycoprotein 
Lacritin - A tear glycoprotein is secreted mainly by the 
lacrimal gland. 
- Increasing mucin amount. 
- Reducing signs of epithelial 
damage. 
Phase II (McNamara et al., 2016; 
Vijmasi et al., 2014) 
Lubricin - It is a lubricant agent present naturally on the 
ocular surface. 
- Decreased by increasing the production of 
cytokines during inflammation. 
- Decreasing friction between 
cornea, conjunctiva, and eyelid. 
- Preventing epithelial dysfunction 
and degradation. 
- Significantly outperformed sodium 
hyaluronate in both signs and 
symptoms of DED. 
Phase II (Lambiase et al., 2017; 
Schmidt et al., 2013) 
Mucin secretagogues 
Rebamipide 2% suspension Quinolinone derivative. - Increasing mucin-like glycoprotein. 
- Stabilizing the mucin component of 
the tear film after applying it four 
times daily for four weeks. 
- phase ІІІ trial in 
the US 
- Approved in 
Japan and South 
Korea 
(Kinoshita et al., 2013) 
Diquafosol sodium 3% A purinergic agonist of the ocular surface 
(P2Y2 receptor agonist). 
- Promoting fluid transfer and mucin 
secretion by activation of 
phospholipase proteins. 
- Increasing mucin production. 
- Has anti-inflammatory action. 
(Koh, 2015) 
Tavilermide (MIM-D3 
(1% or 5%) 
- Mimetogen (MIM-D3) is a synthetic (tyrosine 
kinase) neurotrophin mimetic that belongs to 
the nerve growth factor (NGF) family. 
- It is TrkA receptor agonist. 
- Stimulating TrkA receptors in the 
conjunctiva leads to mucin secretion. 
- Improving corneal damage healing. 
- Improving DED symptoms after 
administration twice daily for 28 
days. 
Phase II (Meerovitch et al., 2013) 
Ecabet sodium A new class of diterpenoids molecules - Increasing the quantity and quality 
of mucin. 
- Improving both signs and 
symptoms of DED after instillation 
four times daily. 
Phase III (Mito et al., 2007) 
Mycophenolate mofetil Corticosteroid-sparing agent - Controlling the eye inflammation 
and enhancing the function of goblet 
cells. 
Phase II (He et al., 2010) 
15(s)-HETE or Icomucret 15(S)-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid is a 
metabolite of arachidonic acid 
- Mucin stimulants. 
- Relieving corneal injury and 
reestablishing corneal integrity. 
Phase III/II (Gamache et al., 2002) 
Anti-inflammatory and/or 
immunosuppressive 
Loteprednol etabonate 0.25% 
suspension 
A retro-metabolically designed corticosteroid 
with low corticosteroid-related adverse 
effects. 
- Lowering the inflammation 
associated with DED after being 
dosed four times daily for 28 days. 
FDA-approved (Beckman et al., 2020) 
OCS-02 anti-TNFα antibody - Relieving severe ocular discomfort 
accompanied with DED effectively. 
Phase II (Galor, 2021) 
A higher concentration of 
cyclosporine (0.09 or 0.1) 
- A T-cell immunomodulator in patients with 
DED 
- It acts as an anti-inflammatory and 
immunosuppressive agent 
- Increasing the density of goblet 
cells in the conjunctiva significantly 
after twice-daily administration. 
- 0.09% formulation (rapid onset of 
action with the same safety of 0.05% 
formulations). 
- 0.1% water-free drug formulation 
delivery solution (earlier onset of 
action, more safe and tolerable). 
Phase III 
Phase II 
(Tauber et al., 2018) 
(Wirta et al., 2019) 
Tacrolimus (0.03%) eye drops Macrolide antibiotics have anti￾inflammatory/immunosuppressive effects 
- Inhibiting the activation of 
lymphocytes and the release of 
inflammatory mediators 
(interleukin-4, interleukin-8, and 
tumor necrosis factor-a). 
- Improving the symptoms and 
clinical signs of DED. 
Phase Ⅳ (Varela Rey et al., 2021) 
Rapamycin (sirolimus) Anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory Improving the signs and symptoms 
of DED 
Phase І (Linares-Alba et al., 2016) 
EBI-005 Interleukin-1 receptor antagonists (IL-1R 
antagonists) with an anti-inflammatory. 
- Improving the signs and symptoms 
of moderate to severe DED. 
Phase ІІІ (Kovalchin et al., 2017) 
Resolvin E1 analogues Lipid-derived autacoids play a role in the 
resolution phase of inflammation. 
- Increasing the tear production. 
- Inhibiting the inflammatory 
enzyme COX2. 
- Inhibiting the ocular inflammation. 
- Protecting the corneal integrity. 
Phase ІІ (Cholkar et al., 2016) 
Biological components 
(continued on next page) 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
10
numbers become available in the market and give good improvement 
results. Several agents act as mucin secretagogues some of them are on 
the market and others are in preclinical and clinical development. In 
Japan regarding secretory mucins, two eye drops secretagogue (diqua￾fosol and rebamipide) were approved in December 2010 and January 
2012, respectively for treating DED (Hori, 2018). 
Diquafosol as a P2Y2 purinergic receptor agonist stimulates the 
secretion of mucin from conjunctival goblet cells into the tear film after 
local instillation. On the other hand, rebamipide might cure the ocular 
surface and increase the goblet cell numbers as it stimulates the 
prostaglandin and mucus glycoprotein synthesis and also inhibits in￾flammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species (Hori, 2018). 
- Anti-inflammatory and/or immunosuppressive e.g., loteprednol 
etabonate, OCS-02, a higher concentration of cyclosporine, dapsone, 
tacrolimus, rapamycin (sirolimus), EBI-005, and resolvin E1 
analogues. 
As previously discussed ocular inflammation is the core feature of 
DED pathogenesis. Consequently using anti-inflammatory drugs 
Table 8 (continued ) 
Albumin 5% A major component of human serum - Improving corneal healing without 
adverse events was observed in 
patients after treatment every four 
hours for four weeks. 
Phase ІІ (Higuchi et al., 2007; 
Shimmura et al., 2003) 
Estradiol A synthetic form of naturally occurring 
estradiol, a steroid sex hormone. 
- Estradiol eye drops improve both 
signs and symptoms of moderate to 
severe DED in postmenopausal 
women. 
- phase II (Schmidl et al., 2021) 
N-acetylcysteine A naturally-occurring amino acid (a derivative 
of L-cysteine). 
- Anti-inflammatory, anti￾collagenolytic and antioxidant 
properties. 
- Improving the ocular symptoms of 
DED after being used topically four 
times per day for two weeks. 
phase II (Li et al., 2018; Schmidl 
et al., 2017) 
Thymosin b4 - A naturally occurring G-actin-binding 
protein 
- Found in high concentrations in ocular 
surface fluid) 
- Lowering pro-inflammatory 
cytokines and improving symptoms 
and signs in DED after application 
for 28 days. 
- Improving the symptoms of DED in 
a murine model. 
phase II (Kim et al., 2018; Sosne 
et al., 2015; Sosne and 
Kleinman, 2015) 
Amniotic membrane extract eye 
drops 
- As cryopreserved amniotic membrane 
- Including growth factors, cytokines, and 
collagens 
- Helping in the corneal wound 
healing. 
- Lowering the fibroblast activity. 
- Decreasing the ocular surface 
inflammation. 
- Limiting use due to difficulty in 
processing and preserving. 
Phase I / ІІ (Murri et al., 2018; Perez 
et al., 2021) 
Mesenchymal stem cells - Multipotent stem cells can distinguish into 
numerous cell types. 
- Have immunomodulatory and anti￾inflammatory effects. 
- Lowering the ocular surface 
inflammation. 
- Restoring of tear production. 
- Restoring of conjunctival goblet 
cells. 
- Improving the symptoms of 
patients with aqueous deficient DED. 
Phase I / ІІ (Lu et al., 2020; Zhang 
et al., 2015) 
Other’s products 
Visomitin (SkQ1) - A synthetic antioxidant 
- Lowering the production of TNFα and IL-6 
- Decreasing the tear film instability. 
- Improving the functional state of 
the cornea. 
- Improving symptoms of patients 
with mild to moderate DED. 
phase II / III (Brzheskiy et al., 2015; 
Zernii et al., 2017) 
Tivanisiran (SYL1001) - a 19-base small interfering RNA (siRNA) 
- Reducing the levels of the human transient 
receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRVP1) protein 
within the cells 
- Reducing ocular pain and 
discomfort in patients with moderate 
to severe DED. 
phase III (Benitez-Del-Castillo et al., 
2016) 
Osmoprotectants 
(e. g., erythritol, L-carnitine, and 
trehalose) 
- Naturally occurring small molecules that 
lower the concentration of intracellular 
organic salts without disturbing cellular 
components. 
- Preventing ocular cell death and 
reducing inflammation in DED 
significantly by lowering the 
hyperosmolarity of tear fluid 
Erythritol and L￾carnitine in lipid￾based eyedrops 
(currently used) 
A trehalose 
solution of 3% 
(currently used) 
(Deng et al., 2014; 
Giannaccare, 2016; 
Kaercher et al., 2009) 
(Orobia et al., 2017) 
Types of osmoprotectants: (Chen 
et al., 2013; Giannaccare, 2016; 
Orobia et al., 2017; Simmons et al., 
2015) 
polyelectrolytes as carbohydrates 
(trehalose and hypromellose) 
▪ polyols (glycerol, erythritol, 
inositol, and sorbitol) 
▪ zwitterions as amino acids (e.g., 
glycine, betaine, proline, and 
taurine) 
▪ methylamines/methyl sulfonium 
solutes (e.g., L-carnitine and 
Erythritol). 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
11
consider one of the effective treatment approaches during DED man￾agement, so the development of this class attracts the attention of sci￾entists. Some of these agents are already used like cyclosporine and 
loteprednol etabonate but there are higher concentrations and new 
ophthalmic delivery systems of them under development of clinical 
trials. Other drugs were performed to assess their safety and efficacy of 
them in patients with DED, but up to now, they are still under 
investigation. 
- Biological components e.g., albumin, topical steroid hormones, N￾acetylcysteine, thymosin b4, amniotic membrane extract, mesen￾chymal stem cells. 
Human serum albumin; blood derivatives can be used for the treat￾ment of DED. It is similar to natural tears; includes growth factors, lipids, 
proteins, and antimicrobial elements. Application of It improves signs and 
symptoms of DED. Moreover, mesenchymal stem cells can be differenti￾ated into several cell types and have an anti-inflammatory and immuno￾modulatory effect. Mesenchymal stem cells are effective in DED treatment 
by enhancing reparative activities of the lacrimal gland after modulation 
of macrophage polarization and so suppress the inflammation in the 
lacrimal gland. In addition, they enhanced the restoration of conjunctival 
goblet cells and the production of tears (Giannaccare et al., 2020). 
Amniotic membrane extract like amniotic membrane is offered 
beneficial substances counting cytokines, growth factors, and collagens 
to induce corneal healing and decrease ocular surface inflammation. 
Like other biological components thymosin b4; presents naturally in the 
ocular surface promotes healing of the ocular surface and inhibit pro￾inflammatory cytokines. Moreover, the beneficial treatment of the 
ocular signs and symptoms of DED was indicated after using topical 
hormone therapy. This potential effect on DED was elucidated by the 
presence of receptors for sex hormones on the meibomian and the 
lacrimal glands that regulate the function of these glands (Barabino 
et al., 2012). N-Acetylcysteine is a naturally occurring derivative of 
L-cysteine amino acid with mucolytic, anticollagenolytic, 
anti-inflammatory, and antioxidant properties (Ziment, 1988). The 
clinical result observed after topical application of N-acetylcysteine 
showed significant improvements in signs and symptoms of DED. 
- Other’s products e.g., visomitin, tivanisiran, and osmoprotectants. 
Visomitin is an antioxidant drug that accumulates inside the cells and 
lowers the damage of overproduction to reactive oxygen species by 
mitochondrial. Also, it decreases the production of TNFα and IL-6 and so 
enhances the protection of the cornea (Skulachev, 2013). Tivanisiran is a 
selective inhibitor to transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1); 
stimulated by inflammatory mediators and hyperosmolarity in DED and 
leads to transmitting a pain signal to the brain (Bourinet et al., 2014). 
Using Tivanisiran in clinical trials for the management of DED has been 
investigated and shows promising results in lowering ocular pain and 
discomfort. Osmoprotectants are naturally occurring molecules; they 
decrease the intracellular organic salts concentration without disturbing 
cellular components. They investigated to lower the tear fluid hyper￾osmolarity associated with DED (Yancey, 2005). 
8. Ocular drug delivery systems 
Commercially available ophthalmic drug formulations are effective 
but less efficient to manage DED. Ocular instillation is the most widely 
preferred route of drug administration, particularly for the management 
of anterior segment diseases, such as DED. Local therapies to the anterior 
segment, the targeted ocular tissues, have low bioavailability; restricted 
by major challenges of physiological eye defences such as tear turnover, 
nasolacrimal duct drainage, and eye complex structure. Thus drug 
therapeutic levels are not sustained for a longer period in target tissues. 
Due to DED being a multifactorial disease involving several underlying 
pathologies, it rapidly progresses to become a chronic refractory disor￾der. Hence, several pharmacological treatments are often concurrently 
recommended to treat DED efficiently. Moreover, the treatment courses 
of DED take a long time with repeated drugs instillation daily. 
Commonly, the excipients used in commercial eye drops can exhibit 
ocular toxicity and aggravate the signs and symptoms of DED (Epstein 
et al., 2009; Walsh and Jones, 2019). So, the challenge in the treatment 
of DED is using ocular formulations suitable and applicable; increasing 
ocular retention time, and improving ocular bioavailability with effi￾cient safety upon use for a long time. 
Nanomedicines, as delivery systems, have great development in 
ophthalmology. They increase ocular drug bioavailability via over￾coming ocular physiological barriers through mucoadhesive ability 
aiming to deliver drugs to the target site with appropriate concentration. 
Moreover, they deliver drugs in a preprogrammed sustained release 
fashion. For DED specifically, the pharmaceutical formulators do their 
best to produce safer formulations without preservatives (Gote et al., 
2019; Weng et al., 2017). 
The topical ophthalmic formulation for hydrophobic drugs has been 
a great challenge for ocular drug delivery. Cyclodextrins (CDs) are three 
types of cyclic oligosaccharides (α, β, and γ) that have a hydrophobic 
cavity and hydrophilic outer surface. Usually, CDs are used to improve 
the solubility of hydrophobic drugs by forming water-soluble complexes 
(Agarwal and Rupenthal, 2016). This complex between drug and CD 
enhances drug solubility in the aqueous part of tear film and penetration 
to the mucin layer that provides sustained drug release and so, increases 
ocular drug bioavailability. Further, the solubility of the hydrophobic 
drugs is increased by using micelles. Micelles are a spherical system with 
a hydrophobic core and hydrophilic shell formed by the self-assembling 
of surfactant molecules. The corneal drug uptake increased by using 
micelles in nano-size. So, this approach was evaluated for a different 
drug to treat DED. The preservative-free 0.09% CsA micelle formulation 
is the first approved FDA micelle formulation for the treatment of DED 
(Mandal et al., 2019). Liposomes are phospholipid bilayer structures, 
used to increase the solubility of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
drugs. Specifically for DED treatment, phospholipids in liposomes play a 
role in the renewing of the lipid layer of the tear film (Acar et al., 2018). 
Liposomal spray, non-drug-loaded, was recently introduced for the 
treatment of DED. The clinical studies of liposomal eye drop as well as 
liposomal spray provide their effectiveness in the treatment of DED. 
The development of liposomal formulations is limited due to several 
factors; poor stability, low encapsulation efficacy, and difficulty in the 
sterilization manufacturing process. Therefore, the proliposomes, dry 
powder that freely assembles to form liposomes, have been developed to 
overcome some of these limitations. 
Nano-emulsions are another form of lipid-based therapy as lipo￾somes. They are composed of both aqueous and oil phases that make 
them useful in the delivery of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs 
to ocular tissue. For lipophilic drugs, oil in water emulsions as a topical 
ophthalmic delivery system is more useful due to the increasing ocular 
permeability and cellular uptake of a drug (Gan et al., 2013). According 
to the chemical nature of components added during the formulation, the 
emulsions are classified into two types anionic and cationic. Both types 
of emulsion increase a drug ocular bioavailability as their small size can 
enhance drug uptake by the cornea. A 0.05% preservative-free CsA 
anionic oil-in-water nanoemulsion was approved by FDA in 2003. On 
the other hand, a double concentration of CsA has displayed better 
ocular tolerability and higher bioavailability in a cationic nanoemulsion 
formula and was approved by the EU in 2015. Moreover, a 0.05% CsA 
nanoemulsion formula was established by the self-nano emulsifying 
drug delivery system (SNEDDS) to provide better physicochemical drug 
stability and solubility. SNEDDS are water-free homogenous mixtures of 
a drug, oil, a surfactant, and a co-surfactant. Upon the addition of water, 
transparent emulsions are formed in nanometers droplet size. 
Other lipid-based therapies; solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs), Lipid 
nanocapsules, nanostructured lipid carriers (NLCs), and lipid-based 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
12
Table 9 
Ocular drug delivery system used for management of DED 
Ocular delivery Advantages Applications References 
- Enhancing drug solubility in the aqueous tear fluid. 
- Penetrating the mucus layer. 
- Providing sustained drug release. 
- Improving ocular drug permeation and bioavailability. 
- Aqueous cyclosporine A (CsA) 
eyedrops 
- Tacrolimus 
- Loteprednol etabonate 
- OCS-02 (anti-TNFα antibody) 
(Agarwal and Rupenthal, 2016; 
Mahmoudi et al., 2020; Soliman 
et al., 2017) 
Increasing uptake in all layers of the cornea. - Micellar CsA formulations 
- Diclofenac sodium eye drops 
(Lallemand et al., 2017; Mandal 
et al., 2019; Quintana-Hau et al., 
2005) 
Their phospholipids stabilize the lipid layer of the tear 
film. 
- CsA 
- Medroxyprogesterone acetate 
- Sirolimus 
(Li et al., 2012; Soriano-Romaní 
et al., 2017) 
Proliposomes - Have a longer shelf-life. 
- High safety and efficacy. 
- CsA (Karn et al., 2014) 
liposome lid sprays 
or liposomal spray 
- They are applied onto the outside of the lids, where the 
polar phospholipids diffuse from the lid surface to the 
tear film to provide a supplement. 
- Providing lubrication, preventing tear film evaporation, 
and so treating DED symptoms. 
- Replacing both aqueous and lipid components of the 
tear film. 
- Lipid-soluble vitamins with ocular 
protective effects (e.g., vitamins A and 
E) 
- Tetracycline, diclofenac, Fluconazole, 
and CsA 
- Osmoprotectants activity through the 
addition of L-carnitine or trehalose 
(Agarwal et al., 2021; Garrigue 
et al., 2017) 
Punctal plug 
“intracanalicular” 
- Acting as a drug reservoir. 
- Biodegrading after completing the release of the drug 
without the need for removal by the physician. 
- Releasing the drug loaded for up to 30 days. 
- Sustained-release dexamethasone (Vickers and Gupta, 2015) 
KPI-121 - Proprietary technology is known as mucus penetrating 
particles (MPP). 
- It is specific for loteprednol etabonate, 
approved by the FDA in 2020. 
(Gupta and Venkateswaran, 
2021; Popov, 2020; Schopf 
et al., 2014, 2015) 
- SFAs (semifluorinated alkanes) 
■ Synthetic pharmacologically inert hydrophobic liquids 
of minimized. 
■ Blurring of vision. 
■ Having extremely low surface tension, so spreading 
rapidly on the ocular surface. 
- No need for preservation when they are used. 
- SFA based Omega-3 eyedrops (ex vivo 
studies) 
- SFA based CsA eyedrops (ex vivo 
studies) 
- SFA based azithromycin suspensions 
eyedrops (ex vivo studies) 
- Medium-chain triglycerides are used as 
the oil phase in ocular emulsions 
- Azithromycin 1.5% 
(Agarwal et al., 2019; Agarwal 
et al., 2018; Garnock-Jones, 
2012; Wirta et al., 2019) 
Nano-emulsion 
Anionic emulsions Cationic 
emulsions 
- Improving ocular drug delivery. 
- Enhancing drug uptake into the cornea. 
Anionic emulsion 
Decreasing eye irritation and vision disturbances 
Cationic emulsions 
The positively charged nanodroplets interact with the 
negatively charged mucin on the ocular surface. 
Therefore this formulation prolongs drug residence time 
and improves drug bioavailability. 
- A preservative-free CsA anionic oil-in￾water nanoemulsion 
- CsA anionic oil-in-water nanoemulsion 
contains sodium hyaluronate 
- Cataionic nanoemulsion of CsA 
(Singh et al., 2020) 
(Daull et al., 2021; Lallemand 
et al., 2017; Tong et al., 2020) 
(Daull et al., 2013; Lallemand 
et al., 2012) 
Selfnanoemulsifying drug delivery 
systems (SNEDDS) 
Improving physicochemical properties of drugs and 
treatment efficacy in DED. 
- CsA eyedrops with SNEDDS (Bang et al., 2019) 
Polymeric Nanoparticles - Cationic nanoparticles 
-Improving mucoadhesion by ionic interaction with 
negatively charged mucin. 
- CsA nanoparticles are surface-modified 
with phenylboronic once-weekly 
administration. 
(Liu et al., 2014) 
Solid lipid nanoparticles 
- Nanostructured Lipid Carriers 
- Lipid nanocapsules 
- Lipid-based (lipomimetic) eyedrops 
- Improving formulation shelf-life. 
- Improving drug ocular bioavailability. 
- CsA formulated in compritol (Gokçe ¨ et al., 2009) 
- A dexamethasone-encapsulated 
cholesterol-Labrafac™ lipophile system. 
(Kumari et al., 2021) 
- Promising corneal mucoadhesion, biodistribution, and 
preclinical efficacy in rabbits. 
- An aqueous ophthalmic, patient￾friendly, CsA formulation. 
(Eldesouky et al., 2021) 
(Agarwal and Craig, 2021) 
(continued on next page) 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
13
(lipomimetics) are attractive alternatives to aqueous artificial tears due 
to their lipid compositions are close to the tear film composition that 
leads to relieve DED symptoms and improve the stability of the tear film 
directly after instillation. In addition to that, these lipid-based nano￾technologies provide a high degree of drug solubility, drug ocular resi￾dence time, and tissue penetration. 
Using cationic nanoparticles mainly prolongs the ocular residence 
time. So, the CsA nanoparticle’s surface is modified with a cationic 
phenylboronic acid proposing that the drug concentration remains 
within the therapeutic range even after once-weekly application. 
Moreover, mucus penetrating nanoparticles (MPN) have been developed 
as another approach to reduce the entrapment of particles and increase 
ocular bioavailability (Lai et al., 2009). Recently, in 2020 FDA approved 
loteprednol etabonate nanoparticles coated with Poloxamer 407 
(KPI-121) that were formulated by the MPN technology for short-term 
DED treatment. 
Semifluorinated alkanes (SFAs) are non-aqueous vehicles used to 
formulate eye drops free from preservatives. These carriers were intro￾duced recently to DED formulations as they enhance the diffusion of a 
drug through the cornea, stabilize the tear film and relieve the DED 
symptoms effectively. 
Contact lenses are thin-curved-disk of polymeric materials used as 
drug carrier systems. They can be classified into types (soft, rigid, and 
semi-rigid) accordingly to the polymers used. Generally, the drug 
bounded and loaded to lenses by presoaked in the drug solution. Drug 
contact lenses offer higher ocular bioavailability than eye drops due to 
their close contact with the cornea. On the other hand, ocular inserts are 
solid or semisolid and soluble or insoluble polymeric devices that are 
applied to the conjunctival sac. They increase ocular residence time, 
prolong the drug release to the eye, and improve patient compliance by 
lowering administration frequency. Further, nanowafers are thin poly￾meric membranes designed as rectangular. They act as a drug reservoir 
to improve therapeutic drug efficacy. Moreover, punctual plugs are a 
biodegradable polymer that dispenses a drug onto the ocular surface up 
to 30 days after insertion. 
Generally, nanomedicine entered to DED management field through 
numerous types of nanocarriers, listed in Table 9, some of them already 
marketed, while others are still under investigation. 
9. Concluding remarks 
The present retrospective article is focusing light on the current 
dealing with DED from a pharmaceutical point of view. In fact and up till 
now there is not sufficient data for complete restoring of tear film effi￾ciency. Early and objective diagnosing of DED will manage the treat￾ment process. 
Nowadays several new diagnostic techniques are already estab￾lished. The use of these techniques shows a great impact on the deter￾mination of the different types and causes of DED. Although the 
underlying causes still need further elucidation. Usually, the ophthal￾mologist prescribes various medicines that act as tear substitution or 
punctual plugs to help alleviate the symptoms of DED, but actually, 
these don’t address the problem. 
Currently, to overcome the problem, researchers have focused on the 
development of devices, processes, and medicines that help in the 
stimulation of tear secretion. Some of them are approved and marketed; 
however, others are still under investigation. DED is a chronic and 
progressive disorder, using medical devices or processes in management 
is not cheap as usual, so using medicines is more suitable and applicable 
for patients. Pharmaceutical scientists facing a great challenge in 
developing ocular delivery systems those help in the treatment of DED 
preserving patient compliance. Theoretically, topical application of 
drugs is the most appropriate for the management of DED, however, the 
inefficient integrity of tear film increases the susceptibility to ocular 
toxicity after long-lasting topical application. So, the ideal topical drug 
delivery system should base on the compromisation between safety and 
efficacy. Practically, they are striving hard to improve ocular drug de￾livery systems for topical applications that target multiple underlying 
causes with high drug bioavailability in formulations lacking 
preservatives 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Supplementary materials 
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in 
the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ejps.2022.106206. 
Appendix 
Table A1. 
Table 9 (continued ) 
Ocular delivery Advantages Applications References 
- Reducing the interfacial tension between the aqueous 
and lipid components of the tear film and improving tear 
film stability and continuity. 
- Providing a more consistent barrier to excessive tear 
evaporation. 
- Oil in water emulsion (soybean oil and 
egg yolk phospholipids in aqueous 
sodium hyaluronate. 
Contact lens - Promoting residence time of drug on the cornea. 
- Increasing drug ocular bioavailability. 
- Polyvinylpyrrolidone 
- Hyaluronic acid 
- Phospholipids 
- Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose 
- Cyclosporine A 
- Dexamethasone 
- Diclofenac 
- Betaine 
(Maulvi et al., 2020) 
(Chang et al., 2021; Maulvi 
et al., 2015) 
(Pitt et al., 2011) 
(White et al., 2011) 
(Choi et al., 2019) 
(Bengani et al., 2020) 
(Demirel and Sarac, 2012) 
(Hsu et al., 2015) 
Nanowafers - They are applied by patients easily. 
- The system is slowly dissolved and so resulting in a long 
duration of the drug. 
- Dexamethasone (Coursey et al., 2015) 
Ocular inserts (Lacrisert) - A preservative-free. 
- Applied once-daily. 
- Used in moderate to severe cases. 
- After application, they are softened and dissolved 
slowly, which leads to stabilizing the tear film and 
relieving symptoms of DED. 
- Hydroxypropyl cellulose (Nguyen and Latkany, 2011) 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
14
References 
Aaron, M., Solley, W.A., Broocker, G., 2005. Chapter 1 - general eye examination. Eds.. 
In: Palay, D.A., Krachmer, J.H. (Eds.), Primary Care Ophthalmology 1–23. 
Acar, D., Molina-Martínez, I.T., Gomez-Ballesteros, ´ M., Guzman-Navarro, ´ M., Benítez￾Del-Castillo, J.M., Herrero-Vanrell, R., 2018. Novel liposome-based and in situ 
gelling artificial tear formulation for dry eye disease treatment. Contact Lens 
Anterior Eye 41, 93–96. 
Agarwal, P., Craig, J.P., 2021. Formulation considerations for the management of dry eye 
disease. 13. 
Agarwal, P., Craig, J.P., Krosser, ¨ S., Eickhoff, K., Swift, S., Rupenthal, I.D., 2019. Topical 
semifluorinated alkane-based azithromycin suspension for the management of 
ocular infections. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 142, 83–91. 
Agarwal, P., Craig, J.P., Rupenthal, I.D., 2021. Formulation considerations for the 
management of dry eye disease. Pharmaceutics 13, 207. 
Agarwal, P., Rupenthal, I.D., 2016. Modern approaches to the ocular delivery of 
cyclosporine A. Drug Discov. Today 21, 977–988. 
Agarwal, P., Scherer, D., Günther, B., Rupenthal, I.D., 2018. Semifluorinated alkane 
based systems for enhanced corneal penetration of poorly soluble drugs. Int. J. 
Pharm. 538, 119–129. 
Akpek, E.K., Amescua, G., Farid, M., Garcia-Ferrer, F.J., Lin, A., Rhee, M.K., Varu, D.M., 
Musch, D.C., Dunn, S.P., Mah, F.S., 2019. Dry eye syndrome preferred practice 
pattern®. Ophthalmology 126, P286–p334. 
Aragona, P., Giannaccare, G., Mencucci, R., Rubino, P., Cantera, E., Rolando, M., 2021. 
Modern approach to the treatment of dry eye, a complex multifactorial disease: a P.I. 
C.A.S.S.O. board review. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 105, 446–453. 
Aragona, P., Rania, L., Micali, A., Puzzolo, D., 2013. Nutrition and dry eye. Curr. 
Ophthalmol. Rep. 1, 58–64. 
Azcarate, P.M., Venincasa, V.D., Feuer, W., Stanczyk, F., Schally, A.V., Galor, A., 2014. 
Androgen deficiency and dry eye syndrome in the aging male. Invest. Ophthalmol. 
Vis. Sci. 55, 5046–5053. 
Bacman, S., Berra, A., Sterin-Borda, L., Borda, E., 2001. Muscarinic acetylcholine 
receptor antibodies as a new marker of dry eye Sjogren ¨ syndrome. Invest. 
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 42, 321–327. 
Bang, S.P., Yeon, C.Y., Adhikari, N., Neupane, S., Kim, H., Lee, D.C., Son, M.J., Lee, H.G., 
Kim, J.-Y., Jun, J.H., 2019. Cyclosporine A eyedrops with self-nanoemulsifying drug 
delivery systems have improved physicochemical properties and efficacy against dry 
eye disease in a murine dry eye model. PLoS ONE 14, e0224805. -e0224805. 
Barabino, S., Chen, Y., Chauhan, S., Dana, R., 2012. Ocular surface immunity: 
homeostatic mechanisms and their disruption in dry eye disease. Prog. Retin. Eye 
Res. 31, 271–285. 
Barabino, S., Shen, L., Chen, L., Rashid, S., Rolando, M., Dana, M.R., 2005. The 
controlled-environment chamber: a new mouse model of dry eye. Invest. 
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 46, 2766–2771. 
Beckman, K., Katz, J., Majmudar, P., Rostov, A., 2020. Loteprednol etabonate for the 
treatment of dry eye disease. J. Ocular Pharmacol. Therap. 36, 497–511. 
Bengani, L.C., Kobashi, H., Ross, A.E., Zhai, H., Salvador-Culla, B., Tulsan, R., Kolovou, P. 
E., Mittal, S.K., Chauhan, S.K., Kohane, D.S., Ciolino, J.B., 2020. Steroid-eluting 
contact lenses for corneal and intraocular inflammation. Acta Biomater. 116, 
149–161. 
Benitez-Del-Castillo, J.M., Moreno-Montan˜´es, J., Jim´enez-Alfaro, I., Munoz-Negrete, ˜ F.J., 
Turman, K., Palumaa, K., S´
adaba, B., Gonz´
alez, M.V., Ruz, V., Vargas, B., Paneda, ˜ C., 
Martínez, T., Bleau, A.M., Jimenez, A.I., 2016. Safety and efficacy clinical trials for 
SYL1001, a novel short interfering RNA for the treatment of dry eye disease. Invest. 
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 57, 6447–6454. 
Blackie, C.A., Coleman, C.A., Holland, E.J., 2016. The sustained effect (12 months) of a 
single-dose vectored thermal pulsation procedure for meibomian gland dysfunction 
and evaporative dry eye. Clin. Ophthalmol. 10, 1385–1396. 
Bourinet, E., Altier, C., Hildebrand, M.E., Trang, T., Salter, M.W., Zamponi, G.W., 2014. 
Calcium-permeable ion channels in pain signaling. Physiol. Rev. 94, 81–140. 
Brzheskiy, V.V., Efimova, E.L., Vorontsova, T.N., Alekseev, V.N., Gusarevich, O.G., 
Shaidurova, K.N., Ryabtseva, A.A., Andryukhina, O.M., Kamenskikh, T.G., 
Sumarokova, E.S., Miljudin, E.S., Egorov, E.A., Lebedev, O.I., Surov, A.V., Korol, A. 
R., Korol, A.R., Nasinnyk, I.O., Bezditko, P.A., Muzhychuk, O.P., Vygodin, V.A., 
Yani, E.V., Savchenko, A.Y., Karger, E.M., Fedorkin, O.N., Mironov, A.N., 
Ostapenko, V., Popeko, N.A., Skulachev, V.P., Skulachev, M.V., 2015. Results of a 
multicenter, randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled clinical study of the 
efficacy and safety of visomitin eye drops in patients with dry eye syndrome. Adv. 
Ther. 32, 1263–1279. 
Chang, W.-H., Liu, P.-Y., Lin, M.-H., Lu, C.-J., Chou, H.-Y., Nian, C.-Y., Jiang, Y.-T., 
Hsu, Y.-H.H., 2021. Applications of hyaluronic acid in ophthalmology and contact 
lenses. Molecules 26, 2485. 
Chen, W., Zhang, X., Li, J., Wang, Y., Chen, Q., Hou, C., Garrett, Q., 2013. Efficacy of 
osmoprotectants on prevention and treatment of murine dry eye. Invest. 
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 54, 6287–6297. 
Cheng, A.M., Zhao, D., Chen, R., Yin, H.Y., Tighe, S., Sheha, H., Casas, V., Tseng, S.C., 
2016. Accelerated restoration of ocular surface health in dry eye disease by self￾retained cryopreserved amniotic membrane. Ocular Surf. 14, 56–63. 
Choi, J.H., Li, Y., Jin, R., Shrestha, T., Choi, J.S., Lee, W.J., Moon, M.J., Ju, H.T., 
Choi, W., Yoon, K.C., 2019. The efficiency of cyclosporine A-eluting contact lenses 
for the treatment of dry eye. Curr. Eye Res. 44, 486–496. 
Cholkar, K., Gilger, B.C., Mitra, A.K., 2016. Corrigendum to "topical delivery of aqueous 
micellar Resolvin E1 analog (RX-10045)" [Int. J. Pharm. 498 (2016) 326-334]. Int. J. 
Pharm. 509, 528. 
Ciprandi, G., Buscaglia, S., Pesce, G., Lotti, R., Rolando, M., Bagnasco, M., Canonica, G. 
W., 1994. Effects of conjunctival hyperosmolar challenge in allergic subjects and 
normal controls. Int. Arch. Allergy Immunol. 104, 92–96. 
Coursey, T.G., Henriksson, J.T., Marcano, D.C., Shin, C.S., Isenhart, L.C., Ahmed, F., De 
Paiva, C.S., Pflugfelder, S.C., Acharya, G., 2015. Dexamethasone nanowafer as an 
effective therapy for dry eye disease. J. Control. Release 213, 168–174. 
Craig, J.P., Nelson, J.D., Azar, D.T., Belmonte, C., Bron, A.J., Chauhan, S.K., de Paiva, C. 
S., Gomes, J.A.P., Hammitt, K.M., Jones, L., Nichols, J.J., Nichols, K.K., Novack, G. 
D., Stapleton, F.J., Willcox, M.D.P., Wolffsohn, J.S., Sullivan, D.A., 2017. TFOS 
DEWS II Report Executive Summary. Ocular Surf. 15, 802–812. 
Daull, P., Lallemand, F., Philips, B., Lambert, G., Buggage, R., Garrigue, J.S., 2013. 
Distribution of cyclosporine A in ocular tissues after topical administration of 
cyclosporine A cationic emulsions to pigmented rabbits. Cornea 32, 345–354. 
Daull, P., Nagano, T., Gros, E., Feraille, L., Barabino, S., Garrigue, J.-S., 2021. Ocular 
surface response of two preservative-free cylcosporine A emulsion eye drops in a 
mouse model of dry eye. Curr. Eye Res. 46, 1096–1104. 
Table A1 
Definitions of some delivery systems or devices. 
Name Definition References 
Liposome lid sprays Pharmaceutical liposomal 
formulation intended to be 
sprayed on eyelids with or 
without drug-loaded for 
renewing the tear film. 
(Agarwal and 
Craig, 2021) 
Aero Pump’s med spray It is a medically developed 
ophthalmic drug delivery device 
to apply pharmaceutical ocular 
formulations as a mist of nano or 
micro-sized directly onto the 
open eye without causing a blink 
reflex. 
(Kraus, 2020) 
Punctal plugs 
"intracanalicular" 
It is a pharmaceutical moulded 
plug formulation of drugs 
embedded in biodegradable 
polymeric materials such as 
collagen, absorbable 
polyethylene glycol hydrogel, or 
acrylic polymer to close lacrimal 
ducts and release drugs in a 
predetermined time. 
(Vickers and 
Gupta, 2015) 
KPI-121 The ophthalmic suspension uses 
the mucus-penetrating particles 
MPP technology to deliver the 
drug more efficiently to the 
ocular tissues. 
(Gupta and 
Venkateswaran, 
2021) 
Selfnanoemulsifying 
drug delivery systems 
It is an anhydrous homogenous 
mixture of drug, oil, surfactant, 
and cosurfactant that is 
converted to nanoemulsion upon 
dilution with water. 
(Bang et al., 2019) 
Nanostructured Lipid 
Carriers 
It is a pharmaceutical delivery 
system composed mainly of 
liquid oil core enveloped in solid 
lipid nanoparticles. 
(Kumari et al., 
2021) 
Lipid nanocapsules It is a new biomimetic nano 
vector for drug or gene delivery. 
It is composed of lecithin and 
PEGylated surfactant and 
occupies a liquid oil carrying 
drug. 
(Eldesouky et al., 
2021) 
Lipid-based 
(lipomimetic) 
eyedrops 
Eye drops usually contain 
amphipathic lipids such as 
phospholipids 
(phosphatidylcholine) and 
ω-hydroxy fatty acids. 
(Agarwal and 
Craig, 2021) 
Nanowafers They are circular discs nanosized 
loaded with drug and 
administered onto the eye 
surface, where it is applied easily 
as a contact lens. 
(Coursey et al., 
2015) 
Ocular inserts (lacrisert) They are sterile thin, 
multilayered, solid, or semisolid 
devices impregnated with the 
drug and applied in the cul-de￾sac or conjunctival sac. Their 
shape and size are designed 
especially for ophthalmic 
applications. 
(Tsubota et al., 
2020) 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
15
De Paiva, C.S., Corrales, R.M., Villarreal, A.L., Farley, W., Li, D.Q., Stern, M.E., 
Pflugfelder, S.C., 2006a. Apical corneal barrier disruption in experimental murine 
dry eye is abrogated by methylprednisolone and doxycycline. Invest. Ophthalmol. 
Vis. Sci. 47, 2847–2856. 
De Paiva, C.S., Corrales, R.M., Villarreal, A.L., Farley, W.J., Li, D.Q., Stern, M.E., 
Pflugfelder, S.C., 2006b. Corticosteroid and doxycycline suppress MMP-9 and 
inflammatory cytokine expression, MAPK activation in the corneal epithelium in 
experimental dry eye. Exp. Eye Res. 83, 526–535. 
Dell, S.J., Gaster, R.N., Barbarino, S.C., Cunningham, D.N., 2017. Prospective evaluation 
of intense pulsed light and meibomian gland expression efficacy on relieving signs 
and symptoms of dry eye disease due to meibomian gland dysfunction. Clin. 
Ophthalmol. 11, 817–827. 
Demirel, S., Sarac, O., 2012. Late corneal perforation with topical diclofenac sodium use 
after radiotherapy. Eye Contact Lens 38, 197–199. 
Deng, R., Su, Z., Hua, X., Zhang, Z., Li, D.Q., Pflugfelder, S.C., 2014. Osmoprotectants 
suppress the production and activity of matrix metalloproteinases induced by 
hyperosmolarity in primary human corneal epithelial cells. Mol. Vis. 20, 1243–1252. 
Dunn, J.D., Karpecki, P.M., Meske, M.E., Reissman, D., 2021. Evolving knowledge of the 
unmet needs in dry eye disease. Am. J. Manage. Care 27, S23–s32. 
Eldesouky, L.M., El-Moslemany, R.M., Ramadan, A.A., Morsi, M.H., Khalafallah, N.M., 
2021. Cyclosporine lipid nanocapsules as thermoresponsive gel for dry eye 
management: promising corneal mucoadhesion, biodistribution and preclinical 
efficacy in rabbits. Pharmaceutics 13 (3), 360. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
pharmaceutics13030360. Mar 9. 
Epstein, S.P., Ahdoot, M., Marcus, E., Asbell, P.A., 2009. Comparative toxicity of 
preservatives on immortalized corneal and conjunctival epithelial cells. J. Ocular 
Pharmacol. Therap. 25, 113–119. 
Foulks, G.N., Borchman, D., Yappert, M., Kim, S.H., McKay, J.W., 2010. Topical 
azithromycin therapy for meibomian gland dysfunction: clinical response and lipid 
alterations. Cornea 29, 781–788. 
Galor, A., 2021. Efficacy and Safety of OCS-02 a novel, potent, topical TNFα antibody in 
acute anterior uveitis (AAU): a phase 2 study. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 62, 3476, 
3476. 
Gamache, D.A., Wei, Z.Y., Weimer, L.K., Miller, S.T., Spellman, J.M., Yanni, J.M., 2002. 
Corneal protection by the ocular mucin secretagogue 15(S)-HETE in a rabbit model 
of desiccation-induced corneal defect. J. Ocular Pharmacol. Therap. 18, 349–361. 
Gan, L., Wang, J., Jiang, M., Bartlett, H., Ouyang, D., Eperjesi, F., Liu, J., Gan, Y., 2013. 
Recent advances in topical ophthalmic drug delivery with lipid-based nanocarriers. 
Drug Discov. Today 18, 290–297. 
Garnock-Jones, K.P., 2012. Azithromycin 1.5% ophthalmic solution: in purulent 
bacterial or trachomatous conjunctivitis. Drugs 72, 361–373. 
Garrigue, J.-S., Amrane, M., Faure, M.-O., Holopainen, J.M., Tong, L., 2017. Relevance of 
lipid-based products in the management of dry eye disease. J. Ocular Pharmacol. 
Therap. 33, 647–661. 
Giannaccare, G., 2016. A novel osmoprotectant tear substitute for the treatment of dry 
eye disease. Int. J. Ophthalmol. Clin. Res. 3 https://doi.org/10.23937/2378-346X/ 
1410058. 
Giannaccare, G., Carnevali, A., Senni, C., Logozzo, L., Scorcia, V., 2020. Umbilical cord 
blood and serum for the treatment of ocular diseases: a comprehensive review. 
Ophthalmol. Ther. 9, 235–248. 
Gokçe, ¨ E.H., Sandri, G., Egrilmez, ˘ S., Bonferoni, M.C., Güneri, T., Caramella, C., 2009. 
Cyclosporine a-loaded solid lipid nanoparticles: ocular tolerance and in vivo drug 
release in rabbit eyes. Curr. Eye Res. 34, 996–1003. 
Gote, V., Sikder, S., Sicotte, J., Pal, D., 2019. Ocular drug delivery: present innovations 
and future challenges. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 370, 602. 
Gulati, S., Jain, S., 2017. Ocular pharmacology of tear film, dry eye, and allergic 
conjunctivitis. Handb. Exp. Pharmacol. 242, 97–118. 
Gumus, K., Schuetzle, K.L., Pflugfelder, S.C., 2017. Randomized controlled crossover trial 
comparing the impact of sham or intranasal tear neurostimulation on conjunctival 
goblet cell degranulation. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 177, 159–168. 
Gupta, P.K., Venkateswaran, N., 2021. The role of KPI-121 0.25% in the treatment of dry 
eye disease: penetrating the mucus barrier to treat periodic flares. Ther. Adv. 
Ophthalmol. 13, 25158414211012797. 
Gupta, P.K., Vora, G.K., Matossian, C., Kim, M., Stinnett, S., 2016. Outcomes of intense 
pulsed light therapy for treatment of evaporative dry eye disease. Can. J. 
Ophthalmol. 51, 249–253. 
Guzman, ´ M., Miglio, M., Keitelman, I., Shiromizu, C.M., Sabbione, F., Fuentes, F., 
Trevani, A.S., Giordano, M.N., Galletti, J.G., 2020. Transient tear hyperosmolarity 
disrupts the neuroimmune homeostasis of the ocular surface and facilitates dry eye 
onset. Immunology 161, 148–161. 
Hagen, K.B., Bedi, R., Blackie, C.A., Christenson-Akagi, K.J., 2018. Comparison of a 
single-dose vectored thermal pulsation procedure with a 3-month course of daily 
oral doxycycline for moderate-to-severe meibomian gland dysfunction. Clin. 
Ophthalmol. 12, 161–168. 
Haque, R.M., Torkildsen, G.L., Brubaker, K., Zink, R.C., Kowalski, R.P., Mah, F.S., 
Pflugfelder, S.C., 2010. Multicenter open-label study evaluating the efficacy of 
azithromycin ophthalmic solution 1% on the signs and symptoms of subjects with 
blepharitis. Cornea 29, 871–877. 
He, H., Ding, H., Liao, A., Liu, Q., Yang, J., Zhong, X., 2010. Effects of mycophenolate 
mofetil on proliferation and mucin-5AC expression in human conjunctival goblet 
cells in vitro. Mol. Vis. 16, 1913–1919. 
Hessen, M., Akpek, E.K., 2014. Dry eye: an inflammatory ocular disease. J. Ophthal. Vis. 
Res. 9, 240–250. 
Higuchi, A., Ueno, R., Shimmura, S., Suematsu, M., Dogru, M., Tsubota, K., 2007. 
Albumin rescues ocular epithelial cells from cell death in dry eye. Curr. Eye Res. 32, 
83–88. 
Hori, Y., 2018. Secreted mucins on the ocular surface. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 59, 
DES151–DES156. 
Hsu, K.H., de la Jara, P.L., Ariyavidana, A., Watling, J., Holden, B., Garrett, Q., 
Chauhan, A., 2015. Release of betaine and dexpanthenol from vitamin E modified 
silicone-hydrogel contact lenses. Curr. Eye Res. 40, 267–273. 
Javadi, M.A., Feizi, S., 2011. Dry eye syndrome. J. Ophthal. Vis. Res. 6, 192–198. 
Jones, L., Downie, L.E., Korb, D., Benitez-Del-Castillo, J.M., Dana, R., Deng, S.X., 
Dong, P.N., Geerling, G., Hida, R.Y., Liu, Y., Seo, K.Y., Tauber, J., Wakamatsu, T.H., 
Xu, J., Wolffsohn, J.S., Craig, J.P., 2017. TFOS DEWS II management and therapy 
report. Ocular Surf. 15, 575–628. 
Kaercher, T., Buchholz, P., Kimmich, F., 2009. Treatment of patients with 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca with optive: results of a multicenter, open-label 
observational study in Germany. Clin. Ophthalmol. 3, 33–39. 
Kamiya, K., Nakanishi, M., Ishii, R., Kobashi, H., Igarashi, A., Sato, N., Shimizu, K., 2012. 
Clinical evaluation of the additive effect of diquafosol tetrasodium on sodium 
hyaluronate monotherapy in patients with dry eye syndrome: a prospective, 
randomized, multicenter study. Eye 26, 1363–1368. 
Kangari, H., Eftekhari, M.H., Sardari, S., Hashemi, H., Salamzadeh, J., Ghassemi￾Broumand, M., Khabazkhoob, M., 2013. Short-term consumption of oral omega-3 
and dry eye syndrome. Ophthalmology 120, 2191–2196. 
Karn, P.R., Jin, S.E., Lee, B.J., Sun, B.K., Kim, M.S., Sung, J.H., Hwang, S.J., 2014. 
Preparation and evaluation of cyclosporin A-containing proliposomes: a comparison 
of the supercritical antisolvent process with the conventional film method. Int. J. 
Nanomed. 9, 5079–5091. 
Kathuria, A., Shamloo, K., Jhanji, V., Sharma, A., 2021. Categorization of marketed 
artificial tear formulations based on their ingredients: a rational approach for their 
use. 10. 
Kim, C.E., Kleinman, H.K., Sosne, G., Ousler, G.W., Kim, K., Kang, S., Yang, J., 2018. 
RGN-259 (thymosin β4) improves clinically important dry eye efficacies in 
comparison with prescription drugs in a dry eye model. Sci. Rep. 8, 10500. 
Kinoshita, S., Oshiden, K., Awamura, S., Suzuki, H., Nakamichi, N., Yokoi, N., 2013. 
A randomized, multicenter phase 3 study comparing 2% rebamipide (OPC-12759) 
with 0.1% sodium hyaluronate in the treatment of dry eye. Ophthalmology 120, 
1158–1165. 
Koh, S., 2015. Clinical utility of 3% diquafosol ophthalmic solution in the treatment of 
dry eyes. Clin. Ophthalmol. 9, 865–872. 
Kojima, T., Dogru, M., Kawashima, M., Nakamura, S., Tsubota, K., 2020. Advances in the 
diagnosis and treatment of dry eye. Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 100842 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.preteyeres.2020.100842. 
Kovalchin, J., King, B., Masci, A., Hopkins, E., Fry, J., Hou, J., Li, C., Tenneson, K., 
Weber, S., Wolfe, G., Collins, K., Furfine, E., 2017. Preclinical development of EBI- 
005: an IL-1 receptor-1 inhibitor for the topical ocular treatment of ocular surface 
inflammatory diseases. Eye Contact Lens 44, 1. 
Kraus R, Woesthuis W, “Advanced Drug Delivery for Dry Eye Treatment”. 
ONdrugDelivery Magazine, Issue 104 (Jan 2020), pp 4–6. 
Kumari, S., Dandamudi, M., Rani, S., Behaeghel, E., Behl, G., Kent, D., O’Reilly, N.J., 
O’Donovan, O., McLoughlin, P., Fitzhenry, L., 2021. Dexamethasone-loaded 
nanostructured lipid carriers for the treatment of dry eye disease. Pharmaceutics 13, 
905. 
Lai, S.K., Wang, Y.Y., Hanes, J., 2009. Mucus-penetrating nanoparticles for drug and 
gene delivery to mucosal tissues. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 61, 158–171. 
Lallemand, F., Daull, P., Benita, S., Buggage, R., Garrigue, J.S., 2012. Successfully 
improving ocular drug delivery using the cationic nanoemulsion, novasorb. J. Drug 
Deliv. 2012, 604204. 
Lallemand, F., Schmitt, M., Bourges, J.L., Gurny, R., Benita, S., Garrigue, J.S., 2017. 
Cyclosporine A delivery to the eye: a comprehensive review of academic and 
industrial efforts. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 117, 14–28. 
3rd Lambiase, A., Sullivan, B.D., Schmidt, T.A., Sullivan, D.A., Jay, G.D., Truitt, E.R., 
Bruscolini, A., Sacchetti, M., Mantelli, F., 2017. A two-week, randomized, double￾masked study to evaluate safety and efficacy of lubricin (150μg/mL) eye drops 
versus sodium hyaluronate (HA) 0.18% eye drops (Vismed®) in patients with 
moderate dry eye disease. Ocular Surf. 15, 77–87. 
Lemp, M.A., Bron, A.J., Baudouin, C., Benítez Del Castillo, J.M., Geffen, D., Tauber, J., 
Foulks, G.N., Pepose, J.S., Sullivan, B.D., 2011. Tear osmolarity in the diagnosis and 
management of dry eye disease. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 151, 792–798 e791. 
Leonardi, A., Flamion, B., Baudouin, C., 2017. Keratitis in dry eye disease and topical 
ciclosporin A. Ocular Immunol. Inflam. 25, 577–586. 
Leung, E.W., Medeiros, F.A., Weinreb, R.N., 2008. Prevalence of ocular surface disease in 
glaucoma patients. J. Glaucoma 17, 350–355. 
Li, N., Zhuang, C.Y., Wang, M., Sui, C.G., Pan, W.S., 2012. Low molecular weight 
chitosan-coated liposomes for ocular drug delivery: in vitro and in vivo studies. Drug 
Deliv. 19, 28–35. 
Li, X., Kang, B., Eom, Y., Lee, H.K., Kim, H.M., Song, J.S., 2019. The protective effect of a 
topical mucin secretagogue on ocular surface damage induced by airborne carbon 
black exposure. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 60, 255–264. 
Li, X., Kang, B., Woo, I.H., Eom, Y., Lee, H.K., Kim, H.M., Song, J.S., 2018. Effects of 
topical mucolytic agents on the tears and ocular surface: a plausible animal model of 
mucin-deficient dry eye. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 59, 3104–3114. 
Linares-Alba, M.A., Gomez-Guajardo, ´ M.B., Fonzar, J.F., Brooks, D.E., García-S´
anchez, G. 
A., Bernad-Bernad, M.J., 2016. Preformulation studies of a liposomal formulation 
containing sirolimus for the treatment of dry eye disease. J. Ocular Pharmacol. 
Therap. 32, 11–22. 
Liu, A., Ji, J., 2014. Omega-3 essential fatty acids therapy for dry eye syndrome: a meta￾analysis of randomized controlled studies. Med. Sci. Monit. 20, 1583–1589. 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
16
Liu, H., Begley, C., Chen, M., Bradley, A., Bonanno, J., McNamara, N., Nelson, J., 
Simpson, T., 2009. A link between tear instability and hyperosmolarity in dry eye. 
Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 50, 3671–3679. 
Liu, S., Chang, C.-N., Verma, M., Hileeto, D., Muntz, A., Stahl, U., Woods, J., Jones, L., 
Gu, F., 2014. Phenylboronic acid modified mucoadhesive nanoparticle drug carriers 
facilitate weekly treatment of experimentallyinduced dry eye syndrome. Nano Res. 
8, 621–635. 
Lu, X., Li, N., Zhao, L., Guo, D., Yi, H., Yang, L., Liu, X., Sun, D., Nian, H., Wei, R., 2020. 
Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells alleviate ongoing autoimmune 
dacryoadenitis in rabbits via polarizing macrophages into an anti-inflammatory 
phenotype. Exp. Eye Res. 191, 107905, 107905. 
Luo, L., Li, D.Q., Corrales, R.M., Pflugfelder, S.C., 2005. Hyperosmolar saline is a 
proinflammatory stress on the mouse ocular surface. Eye Contact Lens 31, 186–193. 
Macri, A., Rolando, M., Pflugfelder, S., 2000. A standardized visual scale for evaluation 
of tear fluorescein clearance. Ophthalmology 107, 1338–1343. 
Magno, M., Moschowits, E., Arita, R., Vehof, J., Utheim, T.P., 2021. Intraductal 
meibomian gland probing and its efficacy in the treatment of meibomian gland 
dysfunction. Surv. Ophthalmol. 66, 612–622. 
Mahmoudi, A., Malaekeh-Nikouei, B., Hanafi-Bojd, M.Y., Toloei, M., Hosseini, M., 
Nikandish, M., 2020. Preliminary in vivo safety evaluation of a tacrolimus eye drop 
formulation using hydroxypropyl beta cyclodextrin after ocular administration in 
NZW rabbits. Clin. Ophthalmol. 14, 947–953. 
Mandal, A., Gote, V., Pal, D., Ogundele, A., Mitra, A.K., 2019. Ocular pharmacokinetics 
of a topical ophthalmic nanomicellar solution of cyclosporine (Cequa®) for dry eye 
disease. Pharm. Res. 36, 36. 
Marsh, P., Pflugfelder, S.C., 1999. Topical nonpreserved methylprednisolone therapy for 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca in Sjogren ¨ syndrome. Ophthalmology 106, 811–816. 
Maskin, S.L., Testa, W.R., 2018. Growth of meibomian gland tissue after intraductal 
meibomian gland probing in patients with obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction. 
Br. J. Ophthalmol. 102, 59–68. 
Maulvi, F.A., Patel, P.J., Soni, P.D., Desai, A.R., Desai, D.T., Shukla, M.R., Ranch, K.M., 
Shah, S.A., Shah, D.O., 2020. Novel poly(vinylpyrrolidone)-coated silicone contact 
lenses to improve tear volume during lens wear: in vitro and in vivo studies. ACS 
Omega 5, 18148–18154. 
Maulvi, F.A., Soni, T.G., Shah, D.O., 2015. Extended release of hyaluronic acid from 
hydrogel contact lenses for dry eye syndrome. J. Biomater. Sci. 26, 1035–1050. 
Polymer edition. 
McCarty, C.A., Bansal, A.K., Livingston, P.M., Stanislavsky, Y.L., Taylor, H.R., 1998. The 
epidemiology of dry eye in Melbourne, Australia. Ophthalmology 105, 1114–1119. 
McDonald, M.B., Sheha, H., Tighe, S., Janik, S.B., Bowden, F.W., Chokshi, A.R., 
Singer, M.A., Nanda, S., Qazi, M.A., Dierker, D., Shupe, A.T., McMurren, B.J., 2018. 
Treatment outcomes in the dry eye amniotic membrane (DREAM) study. Clin. 
Ophthalmol. 12, 677–681. 
McNamara, N.A., Ge, S., Lee, S.M., Enghauser, A.M., Kuehl, L., Chen, F.Y., Gallup, M., 
McKown, R.L., 2016. Reduced levels of tear lacritin are associated with corneal 
neuropathy in patients with the ocular component of Sjogren ¨ ’s syndrome. Invest. 
Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 57, 5237–5243. 
Meerovitch, K., Torkildsen, G., Lonsdale, J., Goldfarb, H., Lama, T., Cumberlidge, G., 
Ousler, G.W., 2013. Safety and efficacy of MIM-D3 ophthalmic solutions in a 
randomized, placebo-controlled Phase 2 clinical trial in patients with dry eye. Clin. 
Ophthalmol. 7, 1275–1285. 
Messmer, E.M., 2015. The pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of dry eye disease. 
Deutsches Arzteblatt Int. 112, 71–81 quiz 82. 
Messmer, E.M., Bulgen, M., Kampik, A., 2010. Hyperosmolarity of the tear film in dry eye 
syndrome. Dev. Ophthalmol. 45, 129–138. 
Milner, M.S., Beckman, K.A., Luchs, J.I., Allen, Q.B., Awdeh, R.M., Berdahl, J., Boland, T. 
S., Buznego, C., Gira, J.P., Goldberg, D.F., Goldman, D., Goyal, R.K., Jackson, M.A., 
Katz, J., Kim, T., Majmudar, P.A., Malhotra, R.P., McDonald, M.B., Rajpal, R.K., 
Raviv, T., Rowen, S., Shamie, N., Solomon, J.D., Stonecipher, K., Tauber, S., 
Trattler, W., Walter, K.A., Waring, G.O.t., Weinstock, R.J., Wiley, W.F., Yeu, E., 
2017. Dysfunctional tear syndrome: dry eye disease and associated tear film 
disorders - new strategies for diagnosis and treatment. Curr. Opin. Ophthalmol. 27 
(1), 3–47. 
Mito, C., Tokushige, H., Kida, T., Sakaki, H., Ogawa, T., 2007. Ecabet sodium promotes 
MUC5AC secretion in rabbit tears. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 48, 384, 384. 
Modis, ´ L., Szalai, E., 2011. Dry eye diagnosis and management. Expert Rev. Ophthalmol. 
6, 67–79. 
Moss, S.E., Klein, R., Klein, B.E., 2000. Prevalence of and risk factors for dry eye 
syndrome. Arch. Ophthalmol. 118, 1264–1268. 
Murri, M.S., Moshirfar, M., Birdsong, O.C., Ronquillo, Y.C., Ding, Y., Hoopes, P.C., 2018. 
Amniotic membrane extract and eye drops: a review of literature and clinical 
application. Clin. Ophthalmol. 12, 1105–1112. 
Nguyen, M.T.B., Thakrar, V., Chan, C.C., 2018. EyePrintPRO therapeutic scleral contact 
lens: indications and outcomes. Can. J. Ophthalmol. 53, 66–70. 
Nguyen, T., Latkany, R., 2011. Review of hydroxypropyl cellulose ophthalmic inserts for 
treatment of dry eye. Clin. Ophthalmol. 5, 587–591. 
O’Neil, E.C., Henderson, M., Massaro-Giordano, M., Bunya, V.Y., 2019. Advances in dry 
eye disease treatment. Curr. Opin. Ophthalmol. 30, 166–178. 
Mateo Orobia, A.J., Casas Pascual, P., Cristobal ´ Bescos, ´ J.A., ´ Perez García, D., Peiro 
Embid, C., Del Buey Sayas, M.A., ´ Korobko Kulikova, V., Lafuente Ojeda, N., 2015. 
Effects of 3% trehalose as an adjuvant treatment after LASIK. Clin Ophthalmol. 11, 
347–353. 
Perez, M., Barreales, S., Sabater-Cruz, N., Martinez-Conesa, E., Vilarrodona, A., Casaroli￾Marano, R., 2021. Amniotic membrane extract eye drops: a new approach to severe 
ocular surface pathologies. Cell Tissue Bank. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10561-021- 
09962-4. 
Perry, H.D., 2008. Dry eye disease: pathophysiology, classification, and diagnosis. Am. J. 
Manage. Care 14, S79–S87. 
Pflugfelder, S.C., 2004. Antiinflammatory therapy for dry eye. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 137, 
337–342. 
Pflugfelder, S.C., de Paiva, C.S., 2017. The pathophysiology of dry eye disease: what we 
know and future directions for research. Ophthalmology 124, S4–s13. 
Pflugfelder, S.C., Solomon, A., Stern, M.E., 2000. The diagnosis and management of dry 
eye: a twenty-five-year review. Cornea 19, 644–649. 
Pitt, W.G., Jack, D.R., Zhao, Y., Nelson, J.L., Pruitt, J.D., 2011. Loading and release of a 
phospholipid from contact lenses. Optometry and vision science : official publication 
of the American Academy of Optometry 88, 502–506. 
Popov, A., 2020. Mucus-Penetrating Particles and the Role of Ocular Mucus as a Barrier 
to Micro- and Nanosuspensions. J. Ocular Pharmacol. Therap. 36, 366–375. https:// 
doi.org/10.1089/jop.2020.0022. 
Porola, P., Laine, M., Virkki, L., Poduval, P., Konttinen, Y.T., 2007. The influence of sex 
steroids on Sjogren ¨ ’s syndrome. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1108, 426–432. 
Pucker, A.D., Ng, S.M., Nichols, J.J., 2016. Over the counter (OTC) artificial tear drops 
for dry eye syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2, CD009729. CD009729. 
Quintana-Hau, J.D., Cruz-Olmos, E., Lopez-S ´ ´
anchez, M.I., Sanchez-Castellanos, ´ V., Baiza￾Duran, ´ L., Gonzalez, ´ J.R., Tornero, M., Mondragon-Flores, ´ R., Hern´
andez￾Santoyo, A., 2005. Characterization of the novel ophthalmic drug carrier Sophisen in 
two of its derivatives: 3A Ofteno and Modusik-A Ofteno. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 31, 
263–269. 
Rashid, S., Jin, Y., Ecoiffier, T., Barabino, S., Schaumberg, D.A., Dana, M.R., 2008. 
Topical omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids for treatment of dry eye. Arch. 
Ophthalmol. 126, 219–225. 
Rolando, M., Cantera, E., Mencucci, R., Rubino, P., Aragona, P., 2018. The correct 
diagnosis and therapeutic management of tear dysfunction: recommendations of the 
P.I.C.A.S.S.O. board. 38, 875–895. 
Rolando, M., Terragna, F., Giordano, G., Calabria, G., 1990. Conjunctival surface damage 
distribution in keratoconjunctivitis sicca. An impression cytology study. 
Ophthalmologica 200 (6), 170–176. https://doi.org/10.1159/000310101. 
Romero-Rangel, T., Stavrou, P., Cotter, J., Rosenthal, P., Baltatzis, S., Foster, C.S., 2000. 
Gas-permeable scleral contact lens therapy in ocular surface disease. Am. J. 
Ophthalmol. 130, 25–32. 
Rossi, G.C., Tinelli, C., Pasinetti, G.M., Milano, G., Bianchi, P.E., 2009. Dry eye 
syndrome-related quality of life in glaucoma patients. Eur. J. Ophthalmol. 19, 
572–579. 
Sall, K., Stevenson, O.D., Mundorf, T.K., Reis, B.L., 2000. Two multicenter, randomized 
studies of the efficacy and safety of cyclosporine ophthalmic emulsion in moderate to 
severe dry eye disease. CsA phase 3 study group. Ophthalmology 107, 631–639. 
Schaumberg, D.A., Buring, J.E., Sullivan, D.A., Dana, M.R., 2001. Hormone replacement 
therapy and dry eye syndrome. JAMA 286, 2114–2119. 
Schmidl, D., Szalai, L., Kiss, O.G., Schmetterer, L., Garhofer, ¨ G., 2021. A phase II, 
multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-masked trial of a topical 
estradiol ophthalmic formulation in postmenopausal women with moderate-to￾severe dry eye disease. Adv. Ther. 38, 1975–1986. 
Schmidl, D., Werkmeister, R., Kaya, S., Unterhuber, A., Witkowska, K.J., 
Baumgartner, R., Holler, ¨ S., O’Rourke, M., Peterson, W., Wolter, A., Prinz, M., 
Schmetterer, L., Garhofer, ¨ G., 2017. A controlled, randomized double-blind study to 
evaluate the safety and efficacy of chitosan-N-acetylcysteine for the treatment of dry 
eye syndrome. J. Ocular Pharmacol. Therap. 33, 375–382. 
Schmidt, T.A., Sullivan, D.A., Knop, E., Richards, S.M., Knop, N., Liu, S., Sahin, A., 
Darabad, R.R., Morrison, S., Kam, W.R., Sullivan, B.D., 2013. Transcription, 
translation, and function of lubricin, a boundary lubricant, at the ocular surface. 
JAMA Ophthalmol. 131, 766–776. 
Schopf, L., Enlow, E., Popov, A., Bourassa, J., Chen, H., 2014. Ocular pharmacokinetics 
of a novel loteprednol etabonate 0.4% ophthalmic formulation. Ophthalmol Ther 3, 
63–72. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40123-014-0021-z. 
Schopf, L.R., Popov, A.M., Enlow, E.M., Bourassa, J.L., Ong, W.Z., Nowak, P., Chen, H., 
2015. Topical ocular drug delivery to the back of the eye by mucus-penetrating 
particles. Transl. Vis. Sci. Technol. 4, 11. https://doi.org/10.1167/tvst.4.3.11. 
Sheppard, J.D., Donnenfeld, E.D., Holland, E.J., Slonim, C.B., Solomon, R., Solomon, K. 
D., McDonald, M.B., Perry, H.D., Lane, S.S., Pflugfelder, S.C., Samudre, S.S., 2014. 
Effect of loteprednol etabonate 0.5% on initiation of dry eye treatment with topical 
cyclosporine 0.05%. Eye Contact Lens 40, 289–296. 
Shimmura, S., Ueno, R., Matsumoto, Y., Goto, E., Higuchi, A., Shimazaki, J., Tsubota, K., 
2003. Albumin as a tear supplement in the treatment of severe dry eye. Br. J. 
Ophthalmol. 87, 1279–1283. 
Simmons, P.A., Carlisle-Wilcox, C., Chen, R., Liu, H., Vehige, J.G., 2015. Efficacy, safety, 
and acceptability of a lipid-based artificial tear formulation: a randomized, 
controlled, multicenter clinical trial. Clin. Ther. 37, 858–868. 
Singh, M., Bharadwaj, S., Lee, K.E., Kang, S.G., 2020. Therapeutic nanoemulsions in 
ophthalmic drug administration: Concept in formulations and characterization 
techniques for ocular drug delivery. J. Control. Release 328, 895–916. 
Skulachev, V.P., 2013. Cationic antioxidants as a powerful tool against mitochondrial 
oxidative stress. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 441, 275–279. 
Soliman, O.A.E., Mohamed, E.A.M., El-Dahan, M.S., Khatera, N.A.A., 2017. Potential use 
of cyclodextrin complexes for enhanced stability, anti-inflammatory efficacy, and 
ocular bioavailability of loteprednol etabonate. AAPS PharmSciTech 18, 1228–1241. 
Soriano-Romaní, L., Vicario-de-la-Torre, M., Crespo-Moral, M., Lopez-García, ´ A., 
Herrero-Vanrell, R., Molina-Martínez, I.T., Diebold, Y., 2017. Novel anti￾inflammatory liposomal formulation for the pre-ocular tear film: in vitro and ex vivo 
functionality studies in corneal epithelial cells. Exp. Eye Res. 154, 79–87. 
Sosne, G., Dunn, S.P., Kim, C., 2015. Thymosin β4 significantly improves signs and 
symptoms of severe dry eye in a phase 2 randomized trial. Cornea 34, 491–496. 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 175 (2022) 106206
17
Sosne, G., Kleinman, H.K., 2015. Primary mechanisms of thymosin β4 repair activity in 
dry eye disorders and other tissue injuries. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 56, 
5110–5117. 
Stern, M.E., Beuerman, R.W., Fox, R.I., Gao, J., Mircheff, A.K., Pflugfelder, S.C., 1998. 
The pathology of dry eye: the interaction between the ocular surface and lacrimal 
glands. Cornea 17, 584–589. 
Surette, M.E., 2008. The science behind dietary omega-3 fatty acids. CMAJ 178, 
177–180. 
Syed, Z.A., Sutula, F.C., 2017. Dynamic intraductal meibomian probing: a modified 
approach to the treatment of obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction. Ophthal. 
Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 33, 307–309. 
Tandon, R., Gantyala, S.P., Velpandian, T., Ahuja, V., Sinha, R., Sharma, N., Titiyal, J.S., 
Sen, S., Shukla, D.K., 2012. Study of ocular bioavailability of oral rebamipide to 
determine its potential value in the management of dry eye. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. 
Sci. 53, 2347, 2347. 
Tauber, J., Schechter, B.A., Bacharach, J., Toyos, M.M., Smyth-Medina, R., Weiss, S.L., 
Luchs, J.I., 2018. A Phase II/III, randomized, double-masked, vehicle-controlled, 
dose-ranging study of the safety and efficacy of OTX-101 in the treatment of dry eye 
disease. Clin. Ophthalmol. 12, 1921–1929. 
Tong, L., Sun, C.-C., Yoon, K.C., Siong, R., Puangsricharern, V., Baudouin, C., 2020. 
Cyclosporine anionic and cationic ophthalmic emulsions in dry eye disease: a 
literature review. Ocul. Immunol. Inflamm. 29, 1–10. 
Tsubota, K., Yokoi, N., Watanabe, H., Dogru, M., Kojima, T., Yamada, M., Kinoshita, S., 
Kim, H.M., Tchah, H.W., Hyon, J.Y., Yoon, K.C., Seo, K.Y., Sun, X., Chen, W., 
Liang, L., Li, M., Tong, L., Hu, F.R., Puangsricharern, V., Lim-Bon-Siong, R., Yong, T. 
K., Liu, Z., Shimazaki, J., 2020. A new perspective on dry eye classification: proposal 
by the Asia dry eye society. Eye Contact Lens 46 (1), S2–s13. 
Uchino, M., Schaumberg, D.A., Dogru, M., Uchino, Y., Fukagawa, K., Shimmura, S., 
Satoh, T., Takebayashi, T., Tsubota, K., 2008. Prevalence of dry eye disease among 
Japanese visual display terminal users. Ophthalmology 115, 1982–1988. 
Varela Rey, I., Gonzalez-Barcia, M., García-Quintanilla, L., Castro-Balado, A., Busto￾Iglesias, M., Zarra-Ferro, I., Fernandez-Ferreiro, ´ A., 2021. 4CPS-323 evaluation of 
the use, adherence and tolerance of 0.03% tacrolimus eye drops. Eur. J. Hosp. 
Pharm. 28, A76. A76. 
Vickers, L.A., Gupta, P.K., 2015. The future of dry eye treatment: a glance into the 
therapeutic pipeline. Ophthalmol. Ther. 4, 69–78. 
Vijmasi, T., Chen, F.Y., Balasubbu, S., Gallup, M., McKown, R.L., Laurie, G.W., 
McNamara, N.A., 2014. Topical administration of lacritin is a novel therapy for 
aqueous-deficient dry eye disease. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 55, 5401–5409. 
Walsh, K., Jones, L., 2019. The use of preservatives in dry eye drops. Clin. Ophthalmol. 
13, 1409–1425. 
Wei, Y., Asbell, P.A., 2014. The core mechanism of dry eye disease is inflammation. Eye 
Contact Lens 40, 248–256. 
Weng, Y., Liu, J., Jin, S., Guo, W., Liang, X., Hu, Z., 2017. Nanotechnology-based 
strategies for treatment of ocular disease. Acta Pharma. Sin. B 7, 281–291. 
White, C.J., McBride, M.K., Pate, K.M., Tieppo, A., Byrne, M.E., 2011. Extended release 
of high molecular weight hydroxypropyl methylcellulose from molecularly 
imprinted, extended wear silicone hydrogel contact lenses. Biomaterials 32, 
5698–5705. 
Wilson, S.E., 2003. Inflammation: a unifying theory for the origin of dry eye syndrome. 
Manage. Care 12, 14–19. 
Wirta, D.L., Torkildsen, G.L., Moreira, H.R., Lonsdale, J.D., Ciolino, J.B., Jentsch, G., 
Beckert, M., Ousler, G.W., Steven, P., Krosser, ¨ S., 2019. A clinical phase II study to 
assess efficacy, safety, and tolerability of waterfree cyclosporine formulation for 
treatment of dry eye disease. Ophthalmology 126, 792–800. 
Yancey, P.H., 2005. Organic osmolytes as compatible, metabolic and counteracting 
cytoprotectants in high osmolarity and other stresses. J. Exp. Biol. 208, 2819–2830. 
Yu, M.D., Park, J.K., Kossler, A.L., 2021. Stimul. Tear Prod. 15, 4219–4226. 
Zernii, E.Y., Gancharova, O.S., Baksheeva, V.E., Golovastova, M.O., Kabanova, E.I., 
Savchenko, M.S., Tiulina, V.V., Sotnikova, L.F., Zamyatnin, A.A., Philippov, P.P., 
Senin, I.I., 2017. Mitochondria-targeted antioxidant SkQ1 prevents anesthesia￾induced dry eye syndrome. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2017, 9281519 https://doi.org/ 
10.1155/2017/9281519. 
Zhang, L., Coulson-Thomas, V.J., Ferreira, T.G., Kao, W.W.Y., 2015. Mesenchymal stem 
cells for treating ocular surface diseases. BMC Ophthalmol. 15 (1), 155, 155. 
Zhang, X., Zhao, L., Deng, S., Sun, X., Wang, N., 2016. Dry eye syndrome in patients with 
diabetes mellitus: prevalence, etiology, and clinical characteristics. J. Ophthalmol. 
2016, 8201053, 8201053. 
Ziment, I., 1988. Acetylcysteine: a drug that is much more than a mucokinetic. Biomed. 
Pharmacother. 42, 513–519. 
H.B. Mohamed et al. 
