International Journal of
Molecular Sciences
Review
Defining Dry Eye from a Clinical Perspective
Kazuo Tsubota 1,* , Stephen C. Pflugfelder 2
, Zuguo Liu 3
, Christophe Baudouin 4
,
Hyo Myung Kim 5
, Elisabeth M. Messmer 6
, Friedrich Kruse 7
, Lingyi Liang 8
,
Jimena Tatiana Carreno-Galeano 9
, Maurizio Rolando 10 , Norihiko Yokoi 11
,
Shigeru Kinoshita 12 and Reza Dana 9
1 Department of Ophthalmology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan
2 Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; stevenp@bcm.edu
3 Eye Institute of Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China; zuguoliu@xmu.edu.cn
4 Department of Ophthalmology, Quinze-Vingts Hospital, 75012 Paris, France; cbaudouin@15-20.fr
5 Korea University Medical Center, Anam Hospital, Seoul 02841, Korea; hyomkim@hanmail.net
6 Department of Ophthalmology, Ludwig Maximilian University, 80539 Munich, Germany;
Elisabeth.Messmer@med.uni-muenchen.de
7 Department of Ophthalmology, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany;
Friedrich.Kruse@uk-erlangen.de
8 Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Guangzhou 510060, China; lianglingyi@gzzoc.com
9 Cornea & Refractive Surgery, Massachusetts Eye & Ear, Boston, MA 02114, USA;
JimenaTatiana_CarrenoGaleano@MEEI.HARVARD.EDU (J.T.C.-G.); Reza_Dana@meei.harvard.edu (R.D.)
10 ISPRE OPHTHALMICS (Instituto di Medicina Oftalmica), 16129 Genoa, Italy; maurizio.rolando@gmail.com
11 Department of Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan;
nyokoi@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp
12 Department of Frontier Medical Science and Technology for Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan; shigeruk@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp
* Correspondence: tsubota@z3.keio.jp; Tel.: +81-3-5363-3219
Received: 27 October 2020; Accepted: 27 November 2020; Published: 4 December 2020


Abstract: Over the past decades, the number of patients with dry eye disease (DED) has increased
dramatically. The incidence of DED is higher in Asia than in Europe and North America, suggesting the
involvement of cultural or racial factors in DED etiology. Although many definitions of DED have
been used, discrepancies exist between the various definitions of dry eye disease (DED) used across
the globe. This article presents a clinical consensus on the definition of DED, as formulated in
four meetings with global DED experts. The proposed new definition is as follows: “Dry eye
is a multifactorial disease characterized by a persistently unstable and/or deficient tear film (TF)
causing discomfort and/or visual impairment, accompanied by variable degrees of ocular surface
epitheliopathy, inflammation and neurosensory abnormalities.” The key criteria for the diagnosis of
DED are unstable TF, inflammation, ocular discomfort and visual impairment. This definition also
recommends the assessment of ocular surface epitheliopathy and neurosensory abnormalities in each
patient with suspected DED. It is easily applicable in clinical practice and should help practitioners
diagnose DED consistently. This consensus definition of DED should also help to guide research and
clinical trials that, to date, have been hampered by the lack of an established surrogate endpoint.
Keywords: dry eye; definition; inflammation; tear film breakup; dry eye symptoms; dry eye signs;
corneal epitheliopathy; neuropathic pain
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271; doi:10.3390/ijms21239271 www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 2 of 24
1. Introduction and Existing Definitions of Dry Eye Disease (DED)
Dry eye disease (DED) is a common ocular disorder affecting tens of millions of people; its incidence
and prevalence in Asia is higher than in Europe and North America, suggesting that cultural or racial
factors are involved in DED etiology [1–6].
The common perception of DED is one of a simple disease, primarily caused by decreased tear
production—such as the aqueous tear deficiency (ATD) type of dry eye seen in Sjögren’s syndrome.
However, evidence suggests that a number of conditions may contribute to an unstable tear film
(TF) [7,8]. DED owing to decreased tear production and DED resulting from tear instability alone
share some features but could also exist independently. Severe ATD also leads to a short tear breakup
time (TBUT).
The different clinical presentations of DED has led to some misunderstandings of the condition
and the need for a consensus on a clinical definition. Over the years, various organizations have
proposed different definitions and diagnostic criteria for DED.
In 2017, the most comprehensive of these was the Tear Film & Ocular Surface Society Dry Eye
Workshop (TFOS DEWS II®) Report, which was the result of a workshop involving DED specialists,
academic researchers, optometrists and ophthalmologists [8]. The Asia Dry Eye Society also proposed a
new definition in the same year [7], while the American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO) proposed
the new Dry Eye Syndrome Preferred Practice Patterns in 2018 [9]. All of these definitions emphasize
that an unstable TF is a key feature of DED, but several discrepancies exist among the criteria.
Several of the commonly used DED definitions are summarized in Table 1. Different criteria/parameters
have been used in each definition, some of which are difficult to measure clinically. Several definitions
have also used instability of TF as a primary or secondary criterion for DED.
Table 1. Dry eye disease definitions proposed from 1995 onwards.
Group Instability of Tear Film Global
Consensus
NEI/Industry Workshop on Clinical Trials in Dry Eye (1995) [10] − −
Pflugfelder (2003) [11] P −
TFOS DEWS I (2007) [12] S +
TFOS DEWS II (2017) [8] S +
AAO PPP (2018) [9] P −
Japanese Dry Eye Research Group (2006) [13] − −
Korean Corneal Disease Study Group [14] P −
Chinese Medical Association Ophthalmic Branch Corneal Group [15,16] P −
Asia Dry Eye Society 2017 [7] P +
Japanese Dry Eye Research Group (2016) [17] P −
New Global Consensus Definition P −
P and S indicate if tear instability was a primary (P) or secondary (S) criterion in the definition, respectively. + and −
in the Global Consensus column indicate if the definition was approved by consensus of an international group or
organization. NEI: National Eye Institute; TFOS: Tear Film & Ocular Surface Society; DEWS: International Dry Eye
Workshop; AAO PPP: American Academy of Ophthalmology Preferred Practice Patterns.
DED symptoms and short TBUT (≤5 s) are the criteria most often used to diagnose DED in three
Asian countries (China, Japan and South Korea). Recent studies have emphasized the importance
of an unstable TF, which can present as decreased TBUT in DED [18–20]. Consequently, in 2017,
representatives from China, Japan and South Korea proposed the Asia Dry Eye Society definition of
DED as “a multifactorial disease characterized by unstable TF causing a variety of symptoms and/or
visual impairment, potentially accompanied by ocular surface damage” [7]. DED can be diagnosed by
the presence of both decreased TBUT and subjective symptoms. However, ocular surface staining was
not included as an essential diagnostic criterion in this iteration.
To achieve clinical consensus on the definition of DED, physician-scientists who specialized in
DED met four times: in Chicago at the AAO Annual Meeting (2016), in New Orleans at the AAO
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 3 of 24
Annual Meeting (2017), in Barcelona at the World Ophthalmology Congress (2018) and in Chicago at
the AAO Annual Meeting (2018). The documents produced were approved by all participants, a list of
which is provided at the end of this article (Appendix A).
Clinical Implications
• The range of definitions has contributed to confusion and a lack of consistent diagnosis of DED
across the globe.
• Tear film stability is a sensitive measure of tear dysfunction that can be easily measured, making
it a clinically practical and reproducible marker of DED/tear dysfunction. It should be the key
criterion in a clinical definition of DED.
2. A Proposed New Clinical Definition of Dry Eye Disease
Despite the various proposed definitions of DED, a single global consensus does not exist.
Our discussion about a global definition started in 2016, and active discussions were held on four
occasions based on the TFOS DEWS II® Report, Asia Dry Eye Society, and the preferred practice
patterns of AAO [7–9]. All discussions were conducted from a practical point of view. The primary
question was how to make a proper diagnosis of DED in the clinic. The osmometer and noninvasive
TBUT measurement were excluded, because these measurements are not available in all specialist
eye clinics.
The final new definition proposed is: “Dry eye is a multifactorial disease characterized by a persistently
unstable and/or deficient tear film causing discomfort and/or visual impairment, accompanied by variable
degrees of ocular surface epitheliopathy, inflammation and neurosensory abnormalities.”
The definition emphasizes the importance of unstable TF, inflammation, discomfort and visual
impairment. In addition, epitheliopathy and neurosensory abnormalities are included. According to
the definition, a DED diagnosis can be made when patients have an unstable TF and ocular discomfort
and or visual impairment. Since a patient with decreased TBUT and/or ocular discomfort and no
ocular surface dye staining is easily misdiagnosed as having neurosis, TBUT should be measured
using fluorescein dye for each patient with ocular discomfort. As we describe later, clinicians need to
be cautious in order to not miss visual impairment due to DED, while ocular surface epitheliopathy,
inflammation and neurosensory abnormalities should also be assessed in each patient. These important
concepts will be discussed in detail in following sections.
Clinical Implications
• The proposed new definition of DED is based on a consensus of agreement between DED experts
in different regions worldwide.
• The new definition is aimed at providing practitioners with a practical tool that helps diagnose
DED in the clinic.
• Using this simple clinical definition, all practitioners can make a precise and consistent diagnosis
of DED.
• As the diagnosis can be made using the DED questionnaire and a slit lamp examination
with fluorescein, all practitioners can easily apply this definition in their clinics following
the recommendations outlined in this article.
3. Unstable Tear Film: The Importance of Tear Film Breakup Patterns
The current published data on tears, the TF and DED suggest that the primary mechanisms associating
tear abnormalities to DED symptoms on opening the eye and, at the time of blinking, are tear film breakup
(TFBU) and increased friction, respectively [21]. Ultimately, these mechanisms result in varying degrees of
ocular surface epitheliopathy, inflammation and neurosensory response, each of which is responsible for
specific DED symptoms [21,22].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 4 of 24
3.1. Dynamic Process Involved in the Establishment of Tear Film to Understand Tear Film Breakup
Tear film dynamics comprise two processes, during which the precorneal TF is established.
One tprocess is the deposition of aqueous tears (ATs) to the corneal surface at eye opening [22–27],
and the other is the redistribution of the TF after eye opening. During the deposition process, there are only
polar lipids of the tear film lipid layer (TFLL), and in this process, polar lipids may contaminate the corneal
surface when wettability is impaired. When the deposition process is terminated, the surface tension
gradient of the TFLL causes the upward spread of the TFLL [22–25,27–29]. During this upward spread,
a dimple (i.e., a transient thinning) is produced behind the leading edge of the spreading TFLL due to the
upward drag of the aqueous TF exerted by the TFLL [28,30–32]. Thus, TF redistribution occurs, and when
the upward spread of the TFLL and upward movement of the aqueous TF finishes, the redistribution is
terminated. During the redistribution process, lower-tear meniscus-induced aqueous-TF thinning [33,34]
occur simultaneously with the upward movement of the aqueous TF [22,24,25,27].
3.2. Tear Film Breakup Patterns for Tear Film-Oriented Diagnosis and Their Interpretations
A tear film-oriented diagnosis is a concept in which information is obtained on the integrity of the
TFLL, the aqueous TF and the wettability of the corneal surface that is responsible for TFBU [24,25].
Although presently not a quantitative assessment, this information allows for (1) identification of
the insufficient component of the TF or of the corneal surface epithelium responsible for TFBU,
(2) subclassification of DED and (3) selection of optimal topical therapy.
In severe ATD, not enough ATs are available for deposition. The result can be observed as
either “no” or “incomplete” upward movement of fluorescein-stained aqueous TF or spread of the
TFLL [27,35] (we termed this breakup (BU) pattern “area break” [22,24,25,27]; see Figure 1). However,
even if ATs are sufficient, BU of TF can occur even when aqueous tears are sufficient due to a lack of
mucins, which reduce the wettability of the epithelium (i.e., “spot break” (SB) [22,24,25,27] in Figure 1).
In mild-to-moderate ATD, BU is likely to occur in the inferior part of the cornea (i.e., “line break” (LB)
[22,24,25, in Figure 1). In addition, when the dimple encounters a corneal surface with decreased
wettability, BU occurs (i.e., “dimple break” (DB) [22,25,27] in Figure 1). After the establishment of the
TF, BU occurs even in normal eyes (i.e., “random break” (RB) [22,24,25,27] in Figure 1), and this happens
more frequently in cases of DED with facilitated evaporation. The expansion of a tear film breakup
becomes more rapid, depending on the decrease of wettability of the corneal surface [22,27,36–38],
and it is possible that “line break” and “random break” can accompany the rapid expansion of the
dark spot (i.e., “line break with rapid expansion” (LB with RE) in Figure 1).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 25
Figure 1. Fluorescein breakup (BU) patterns seen immediately after eye opening and after the eye is 
kept open. Related to the establishment of the tear film (TF) on the cornea, there are three phases for 
each fluorescein breakup pattern that can be seen. In the first phase, an area break (AB) or a spot 
break (SB), respectively, can be seen in cases of severe aqueous tear deficient dry eye (ATDDE) or 
decreased wettability dry eye (DWDE). In the second phase, a line break (LB) or a dimple break (DB), 
respectively, can be seen in cases with mild-to-moderate ATDDE or DWDE. In the third phase, a 
random break (RB) can be seen in cases of evaporative dry eye (EDE). RB is also seen in normal eyes, 
in which the BU time is within the normal range, i.e., generally, >10 s. In addition, a modification of 
BU patterns suggesting the association with DWDE is the rapid expansion of BU spots sometimes 
seen in LB and RB.
3.3. Clinical Implications
• Tear-film oriented diagnosis is practical and clinically useful for clinicians engaged in the 
management of DED [22,24,27].
• Further advancement of this approach is expected through a deeper understanding of the 
function of each component of the ocular surface.
• TF stability is maintained by the components of the TF and ocular surface epithelium, and 
insufficiency of those components results in TFBU, a visible core manifestation of DED.
• Classification of TFBU patterns may elucidate the pathophysiology of DED. 
• Clinicians can assess tear film-oriented diagnosis to learn more about the insufficient 
components responsible for TFBU, assess the specific DED subtype and, therefore, decide on 
the most appropriate treatment.
4. Ocular Discomfort: The Importance of Symptoms in Dry Eye Disease 
DED can be a frustrating disease for patients and ophthalmologists. Ocular discomfort is the 
most common complaint, and as a central feature of the disease, it is a fundamental component of 
the definition of DED [7,8,12]. In most cases, ocular discomfort is displayed before DED is 
diagnosed, and it is critical for monitoring the progression of the condition and response to 
treatments. 
Figure 1. Fluorescein breakup (BU) patterns seen immediately after eye opening and after the eye is
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 5 of 24
kept open. Related to the establishment of the tear film (TF) on the cornea, there are three phases for
each fluorescein breakup pattern that can be seen. In the first phase, an area break (AB) or a spot break
(SB), respectively, can be seen in cases of severe aqueous tear deficient dry eye (ATDDE) or decreased
wettability dry eye (DWDE). In the second phase, a line break (LB) or a dimple break (DB), respectively,
can be seen in cases with mild-to-moderate ATDDE or DWDE. In the third phase, a random break (RB)
can be seen in cases of evaporative dry eye (EDE). RB is also seen in normal eyes, in which the BU time
is within the normal range, i.e., generally, >10 s. In addition, a modification of BU patterns suggesting
the association with DWDE is the rapid expansion of BU spots sometimes seen in LB and RB.
3.3. Clinical Implications
• Tear-film oriented diagnosis is practical and clinically useful for clinicians engaged in the
management of DED [22,24,27].
• Further advancement of this approach is expected through a deeper understanding of the function
of each component of the ocular surface.
• TF stability is maintained by the components of the TF and ocular surface epithelium,
and insufficiency of those components results in TFBU, a visible core manifestation of DED.
• Classification of TFBU patterns may elucidate the pathophysiology of DED.
• Clinicians can assess tear film-oriented diagnosis to learn more about the insufficient components
responsible for TFBU, assess the specific DED subtype and, therefore, decide on the most
appropriate treatment.
4. Ocular Discomfort: The Importance of Symptoms in Dry Eye Disease
DED can be a frustrating disease for patients and ophthalmologists. Ocular discomfort is the
most common complaint, and as a central feature of the disease, it is a fundamental component of
the definition of DED [7,8,12]. In most cases, ocular discomfort is displayed before DED is diagnosed,
and it is critical for monitoring the progression of the condition and response to treatments.
Common ocular discomfort can be described as dryness, redness, foreign body sensation,
heavy sensation, pain, light sensitivity, discharge, itching and eye fatigue. The type of ocular
discomfort experienced by patients may be associated with particular DED subtypes, although there is
considerable overlap between them. For example, in diurnal variation, DED symptoms tend to become
more evident later in the day in patients with ATD dry eye [39]. In the classification proposed by the
ADES, patients with short TBUT-type DED may experience more of the heavy sensation, and patients
with staining-type DED may experience more of the foreign body-type sensation [7]. There is overlap
among the symptoms of subtypes.
4.1. Evaluation of Ocular Discomfort with Questionnaires
Ocular discomfort can be evaluated using patient-reported questionnaires (Table 2). Each questionnaire
has advantages in certain scenarios and reflects the impact of DED on everyday function and health-related
quality of life [8]. It is recommended that a validated symptom questionnaire be administered at first
patient presentation.
Table 2. Questionnaires used to evaluate symptoms of dry eye disease (DED).
Questionnaire Initial Launch No. of Questions Screening Criteria for DED Recommendations for Use
McMonnies [40] 1987 12 >14.5
Ocular Surface Disease
Index (OSDI) [41]
2000 12
Mild: 13–22
Moderate: 23–32
Severe: ≥33
Suitable for research and
ATD
National Eye Institute’s
Visual Function
Questionnaire (NEI-VFQ 25)
[42]
2001 25
Adapted for
moderate-to-severe dry eye
Strongly correlated with
OSDI
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 6 of 24
Table 2. Cont.
Questionnaire Initial Launch No. of Questions Screening Criteria for DED Recommendations for Use
Dry Eye Questionnaire
(DEQ) [43]
2002 23
Ocular Comfort Index (OCI)
[44]
2007 12
The only questionnaire that
provides valid measurement
based on Rasch analysis
Symptom Assessment in
Dry Eye (SANDE) [45]
2009 2 Suitable for clinical
assessment
Standard Patient Evaluation
of Eye Dryness (SPEED) [46]
2009 12
No symptoms: 0
Mild-to-moderate: 1–9
Severe: ≥10
Suitable for Meibomian
gland dysfunction
Impact of Dry Eye on
Everyday Living (IDEEL)
[47]
2011 57
Mild 40–50
Moderate 51–63
Severe > 64
Dry Eye-related
Quality-of-life Score (DEQS)
[48]
2013 15
5-Item Dry Eye
Questionnaire (DEQ-5) [49]
2013 5
keratoconjunctivitis sicca: > 6
Suspected Sjögren’s syndrome:
>12
Chinese Dry Eye
Questionnaire [50]
2015 12 Questionnaire validated in
the Chinese population
ATD = aqueous tear deficiency.
4.2. The Pathophysiology of Ocular Discomfort
In general, ocular discomfort is caused by an entity on the ocular surface activating the sensory
nerve, and there are several reasons why this may occur. An unstable TF generates tear hyperosmolarity,
inflammation and epithelial breakdown. This exposes and irritates nociceptive receptors on the ocular
surface and leads to sensations of discomfort. Instability disturbs the optical property of the TF,
becoming an additional source of discomfort. Sometimes, a patient may experience both problems.
Mechanical abrasions from disorders of the lid margin, such as plugging of the meibomian gland
orifice and conjunctivochalasis, can cause blink-related microtrauma to the ocular surface and affect
tear dynamics. Insidious lid abnormalities, such as lagophthalmos, incomplete and decreased blinking
or poor lid-to-globe apposition can prevent the formation of a stable TF and similar discomfort as DED.
Inflammation is a result of a decreased or/and an unstable TF and epithelial defect and creates ocular
irritation. Detailed note-taking to capture details of major symptoms and triggers helps to identify the
origin of discomfort in DED.
4.3. Ocular Discomfort and Incongruity with Signs
There are often discrepancies between signs and symptoms; thorough evaluation of both is critical
in diagnosing DED.
When patients demonstrate severe epithelial breakdown and inflammation but have no related
discomfort; the neurotrophic status should be considered. Neurotrophic keratopathy in the context of
dry eye disease usually stems from long-standing DED such as severe Sjögren’s syndrome and diffusive
ocular surface keratinization in end-stage Stevens-Johnson syndrome, ocular cicatricial pemphigoid
or chemical burn [51]. When patients report obvious discomfort without visible ocular surface signs,
a component of neuropathic pain, also known as ocular neuralgia, is suspected. The typical complaint
of neuropathic pain is hypersensitivity to light and wind, which is not relieved by topical anesthesia [52].
Depression and anxiety can cause chronic discomfort, which exceeds that predicted by clinical signs [53].
Patients with preclinical DED, such as long-term visual display terminal users or contact lens wearers,
might also present with intermittent discomfort but very mild signs. In these cases, individuals may
proceed to typical DED if risk factors are left uncorrected.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 7 of 24
4.4. Clinical Implications
• Ocular discomfort is common and has a range of symptoms. A careful symptom consultation is
recommended for diagnosis.
• Ocular discomfort should be evaluated with a variety of patient-reported questionnaires.
• A thorough evaluation of both signs and symptoms is critical for a correct diagnosis of DED and
to determine treatment decisions.
5. Visual Impairment Caused by Unstable Tear Film
Patients with DED often have impaired visual function that affects functional activities and is
caused by an unstable TF [54–56]. The TF is the first part of the eye traversed by light entering the eye,
and a smooth stable TF is essential for good visual function [57–59]. A recent study showed that an
unstable TF causes increased accommodative microfluctuations, placing a great burden on the ciliary
muscle [60,61]. Once the TF has been stabilized, the symptoms are resolved when the fluctuations stop.
In the context of DED, functional visual acuity assesses the visual functions related to the unstable
TF [58,62]. As compared with the normal visual acuity measurement, functional visual acuity provides
a measure of the real-life functional ability of visual perception. Impaired functional visual acuity can
be recovered by treating DED with punctal occlusion [63] or diquafosol sodium [64–67], which stabilize
the TF. Blue light, often used in computer and smartphone screens, has a short wavelength, which is
easily scattered by an uneven surface, i.e., an unstable TF. Thus, DED patients have more difficulty
seeing blue light, and the light environment can be improved by removing blue light components [68].
The recent acceptance of blue light-reducing glasses for computer users should help with clinical or
preclinical DED.
Clinical Implications
• Given that DED can impair visual function, practitioners should properly evaluate DED symptoms
and visual impairment.
• As simple visual acuity measurements cannot detect visual impairment associated with DED, it is
possible that practitioners underestimate the extent of visual impairment.
• Assessments such as functional visual acuity can be used to assess visual function related to
unstable TF.
• Simple measures such as reducing blue light emitted by devices can be used to improve visual
function in those with unstable TF.
6. Epitheliopathy
Epitheliopathy commonly occurs in DED and contributes to the instability of TF. The distribution
and severity of corneal disease and conjunctival epithelial disease differ among aqueous tear deficient
and sufficient dry eye/tear dysfunction conditions and may not be clinically detectable [55,69–71].
6.1. Corneal Disease
Corneal epithelial disease is more prevalent and severe in ATD syndromes, particularly in Sjögren’s
syndrome and inflammatory conditions such as Stevens–Johnson syndrome and graft versus host
disease, than aqueous tear sufficient dry eye [55,71]. Fluorescein is most frequently used to identify
and measure the severity of corneal epithelial disease [72], and several severity grading schemes have
been proposed [71,73]. Staining develops due to corneal epithelial death, dysfunction or an altered
permeability barrier that has been observed in DED patients and experimental mouse models [72,74–78].
Corneal epithelial disease may also be detected by imaging techniques.
Increased levels and activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) such as MMP-9 and its activator
MMP-3 contribute to corneal barrier disruption [79,80]. MMP-9 knockout mice are resistant to corneal
barrier disruption when exposed to desiccating stress, and MMP inhibitors such as corticosteroids
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 8 of 24
and doxycycline have shown potential in preventing desiccation-induced corneal epithelial barrier
disruption in animal models [81]. This can lead to accelerated desquamation of the apical epithelium
and, in some cases, full thickness epithelial sloughing, which can predispose one to sight-threatening
stromal ulceration and opacification. Mice subjected to desiccating stress show increased expression of
cornified envelope precursors in the corneal epithelium, and patients with Stevens–Johnson syndrome
can show cornification of the corneal epithelium [80,82,83].
6.2. Conjunctival Disease
The conjunctiva has a stratified columnar epithelium with goblet cells that produce tear-stabilizing
gel-forming mucins and immunomodulatory factors such as retinoic acid and transforming growth
factor (TGF)-β2 [84–86]. Desiccation and lacrimal hyposecretion with a loss of tear trophic
factors, activation of stress kinases and inflammatory cytokines, such as interferon gamma (IFN-γ),
alter conjunctival differentiation [82,87]. The Th2 cytokine interleukin (IL)-13 stimulates proliferation
and mucus production, while the Th1 cytokine IFN-γ induces goblet cell entrapment, the expression
of cornified envelope precursors, decreased mucus production, unresponsiveness to cholinergic
stimulation, endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response and apoptosis [88–95].
Conjunctival disease is detected by vital dye staining with lissamine green or Rose Bengal dyes.
Goblet cell loss in the conjunctival epithelium is a well-recognized feature of ATD [96–102].
The most severe ocular surface diseases, such as Stevens–Johnson syndrome, mucous membrane
pemphigoid, graft versus host disease and severe alkali burns involving the conjunctiva, often have a
complete loss of conjunctival goblet cells [69,103–105]. Goblet cell loss is accompanied by decreased
concentration of the goblet cell mucin, MUC5AC, in tears [106] and correlates with increased conjunctival
lissamine green and Rose Bengal dye staining and rapid TBUT [70,107–109]. Eyes with extensive
goblet cell loss often have instantaneous TBU.
6.3. Clinical Implications
• Epitheliopathy is frequently observed in DED but may be clinically undetectable in some patients.
• Epitheliopathy can contribute to instability of TF, blurred vision, altered permeability,
nociceptor exposure and sensitization and pain in DED.
7. Dry Eye Disease and Inflammation
The surface epithelium and the TF contain dendritic cells, macrophages, mast cells, lymphocytes,
fibroblasts, cytokines and additional immune mediators, which guard against pathogens and other
environmental threats. DED may develop when this homeostasis is disrupted by aqueous tear
deficiency, TF hyperosmolarity and inflammation of the ocular surface microenvironment [84]. Local,
autoimmune-mediated ocular surface dysfunction may also play a role in DED pathogenesis [70,87].
Other factors that may contribute to inflammation of the ocular surface include: microtrauma;
hyperosmotic stress; aging; irritants such as microbial antigens and UV light and infection and
systematic inflammatory diseases, conditions and disorders (i.e., auto- and allo-immune diseases,
neuroinflammation and sterile inflammation). In early phase inflammatory DED, any of these factors
can stimulate the production of inflammatory cytokines and their subsequent immune responses.
7.1. Innate Immune Responses in Dry Eye Disease
The immunopathogenic mechanisms in DED are complex and are summarized below and
in Figure 2. In DED, multiple cell types of the innate immune system mediate inflammatory
damage to the ocular surface. Innate immune responses include the upregulation of Toll-like
receptors (TLRs) and nucleotide-binding domain, leucine-rich containing family and pyrin domain
containing-3 (NLRP3) [110,111]. TLR signaling pathways stimulate the production of transcription
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 9 of 24
factors, including activator protein (AP)-1, nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B
cells (NF￾Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
κB) and interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-5 [
2020, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW
112].
10 of 25
Figure 2. Inflammation in dry eye disease (DED). (I) The innate immune response in DED is 
mediated by multiple cells. Natural killer (NK) cells secrete interferon gamma (IFN-γ), which, along 
with other proinflammatory cytokines upregulated at the ocular surface, such as interleukin (IL)-1, 
IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α, promote the maturation of antigen-presenting cells 
(APCs) through inducing the upregulated expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-II, 
CD40, CD80 and CD86. In addition, these proinflammatory cytokines lead to the production of 
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in epithelial cells, which further abrogate the corneal epithelial 
barrier. (II) The adaptive immune response in DED is initiated by the activation and migration of 
activated APCs toward the regional draining lymph nodes, where they prime naïve T cells (Th0) to 
differentiate and expand into IL-17-secreting T-helper cell 17 (Th17) cells and IFN-γ-secreting Th1 
cells. IL-17 inhibits the regulatory T cells (Treg) suppressive function. Effector T cells migrate to the 
ocular surface, where they secrete an array of effector cytokines. Th1 cells secrete IFN-γ, which leads 
to the upregulated production of chemokines such as IL-9 (CXCL9), CXCL10, CXCL11, CXCR3 and 
cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), facilitating the ingress of more inflammatory cells to the ocular 
surface. IL-17 stimulates the production MMP-3 and MMP-9, leading to epithelial cell damage. IL-17 
also increases the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A, VEGF-C, VEGF-D, 
VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-3. With the resolution of ocular inflammation, a small portion of Th17 cells 
convert into long-lived memory Th17 cells mediating chronic inflammation in DED.
The conjunctival epithelium and tears of patients with DED also contain elevated levels of 
inflammatory mediators such as ILs-6 and -23, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and TGF-β1. These 
inflammatory mediators promote differentiation of CD4+ T-helper cell 17 (Th17), which secretes 
IL-17 cytokines (IL-17A and IL-17F), the major pathogenic cells promoting DED (see below), which 
will be described in the next section. Other proinflammatory cytokines produced by epithelial cells 
and macrophages participating in the innate immune response include IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-5 and 
chemokines such as IL-8 (CXCL8) [113].
Figure 2. Inflammation in dry eye disease (DED). (I) The innate immune response in DED is mediated
by multiple cells. Natural killer (NK) cells secrete interferon gamma (IFN-γ), which, along with other
proinflammatory cytokines upregulated at the ocular surface, such as interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6 and tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α, promote the maturation of antigen-presenting cells (APCs) through
inducing the upregulated expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-II, CD40, CD80 and
CD86. In addition, these proinflammatory cytokines lead to the production of matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) in epithelial cells, which further abrogate the corneal epithelial barrier. (II) The adaptive
immune response in DED is initiated by the activation and migration of activated APCs toward the
regional draining lymph nodes, where they prime naïve T cells (Th0) to differentiate and expand into
IL-17-secreting T-helper cell 17 (Th17) cells and IFN-γ-secreting Th1 cells. IL-17 inhibits the regulatory
T cells (Treg) suppressive function. Effector T cells migrate to the ocular surface, where they secrete
an array of effector cytokines. Th1 cells secrete IFN-γ, which leads to the upregulated production of
chemokines such as IL-9 (CXCL9), CXCL10, CXCL11, CXCR3 and cell adhesion molecules (CAMs),
facilitating the ingress of more inflammatory cells to the ocular surface. IL-17 stimulates the production
MMP-3 and MMP-9, leading to epithelial cell damage. IL-17 also increases the expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A, VEGF-C, VEGF-D, VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-3. With the resolution of
ocular inflammation, a small portion of Th17 cells convert into long-lived memory Th17 cells mediating
chronic inflammation in DED.
The conjunctival epithelium and tears of patients with DED also contain elevated levels
of inflammatory mediators such as ILs-6 and -23, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and TGF-β1.
These inflammatory mediators promote differentiation of CD4+ T-helper cell 17 (Th17), which secretes
IL-17 cytokines (IL-17A and IL-17F), the major pathogenic cells promoting DED (see below), which will
be described in the next section. Other proinflammatory cytokines produced by epithelial cells
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 10 of 24
and macrophages participating in the innate immune response include IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-5 and
chemokines such as IL-8 (CXCL8) [113].
TNF-α and IL-1β promote the expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1),
as well as the expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II and co-stimulator
B7 (CD80 and CD86) on antigen-presenting cells (APCs), which mediate APC-T-cell interactions.
IL-1β stimulates the production of TNF-α and MMP-3 [95,114–116]. IL-1β and IFN-γ are associated
with squamous metaplasia of epithelial cells [87,117]. IFN-γ decreases goblet cell differentiation and
mucus production. In vitro, corneal epithelial cells express MHC class II with the stimulation of IFN-γ.
Conjunctival epithelia overexpress MHC class II in a cytokine-rich environment, with a decrease of
goblet cells. Some studies suggest that goblet cells play a critical role in maintaining ocular surface
immune tolerance [85], and their disruption leads to dendritic cell maturation [118]. Fas and the Fas
ligand are also elevated in DED [119–121] and regulate the apoptosis of ocular surface cells in the
extrinsic pathway [122].
7.2. Adaptive Immune Responses in Dry Eye Disease
T cell infiltration in the ocular surface is a hallmark of chronic inflammation, and multiple studies
show that autoreactive T cells play a central role in DED [91,121,123]. APCs activated by inflammatory
mediators migrate to local lymph nodes, where they prime naïve T cells to polarize into effector
CD4+ T-helper (Th1) and Th17 cells [123,124]. These effector cells then migrate to the conjunctiva,
secreting IFN-γ and IL-17, and upregulate the production of a variety of chemokines [113,125,126] and
cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), as well as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C and VEGF-D.
Th17 cell differentiation is promoted by the transcription factor RORγt, which is expressed
in response to IL-6, TGF-β and IL-23 [127]. Th17 cells secrete IL-17 [128,129], which increases
proinflammatory cytokines and MMP3/MMP9 expression in response to desiccating stress.
IL-17-secreted by Th17 cells also increase the expression of VEGF-C and VEGF-D, and their
receptors VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-3, promoting corneal lymphangiogenesis [113] without associated
hemangiogenesis [130,131]. In DED, Th17 homing is mediated by CCL20 [128]. In addition, a unique
Th17 population, secreting both IL-17 and IFN-γ (Th17/1), was identified that amplifies ocular surface
inflammation in DED, and the generation of Th17/1 is facilitated by environmental IL-12 and IL-23 [132].
Furthermore, chronic inflammation in DED is mediated in the long term principally by long-lived Th17
effector cells, namely memory Th17 cells [133]. These pathogenic memory Th17 cells are maintained
by environmental IL-7 and IL-15 [134]. When IL-17 is blocked, DED severity significantly decreases.
The regulatory T cell (Treg; CD4+CD25+Foxp3+) attenuates the immune response by reining in
the autoreactive T cells. Treg expresses integrin αEβ7 (CD103), which limits naïve T cell priming via
the secretion of the anti-inflammatory cytokines (TGF-β and IL-10) and Treg/APC or Treg/T effector
cell interactions [135]. There are two subsets of Tregs: one originating from the thymus (natural
Treg, nTreg) and the other induced in the periphery in the presence of IL-2 and TGF-β (induced Treg,
iTreg). Inadequate suppression by Tregs leads to disruption of immune tolerance and the generation of
effector T cells. The Th17 cells in DED were found to be resistant and functionally antagonistic to Treg
activity [123]. The dysfunction of Treg suppression exacerbates ocular surface inflammation in models
of DED [123].
7.3. Neurogenic Inflammation
Mechanical and inflammatory damage to the ocular surface may lead to the synthesis of
neurotrophic factors that stimulate nerve growth but can also alter the corneal nerve structure, as seen
in the sub-basal corneal nerve plexus, and promote inflammation, which can lead to nerve degeneration.
Epithelial damage induced by hyperosmolarity stimulates the release of vasoactive neuropeptides and
the activation of immune cells, resulting in plasma extravasation and local inflammation [136].
Neuropeptides and neurotrophins found at the ocular surface have also been associated with
nonspecific corneal pain and other DED symptoms.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 11 of 24
These neuropeptides maintain neurogenic inflammation and work together with the immune
responses, not only protecting the ocular surface but, also, initiating the immune response in DED and
regulating its chronicity. Thus, nerve-derived factors can both attenuate and amplify DED severity
depending on the context in which they function.
Hormonal variations may also affect the ocular surface in DED. Studies in animals have reported
that estrogen may upregulate MMP-2 and MMP-9 and increase the expression of inflammatory genes
such as IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-8 in human corneal epithelial cells. By contrast, androgens may reduce
macrophage TNF-α and IL-1β expression. However, some studies have found that estrogen also may
decrease DED severity [137].
In summary, there is increasing evidence that a wide array of immune and nerve-derived factors
can influence one another through complex mechanisms that result in damage to the ocular surface
epithelium, changes in the sub-basal nerve plexus nerve density and function and development of
DED symptoms. Much work remains to be done to better elucidate the interaction of these factors in
chronic DED.
7.4. Clinical Implications
• Inflammation is a key aspect of DED pathogenesis and severity.
• Methods for identification of DED include the RPS InflammaDry Detector, an immunoassay test
for the detection of elevated levels of the MMP-9.
• The control of inflammation, chronically or during clinical flares, is necessary for managing patient
discomfort and ocular surface disease.
• While there can be a lack of correlation between patient symptoms and signs of ocular surface
disease, managing inflammation can help attenuate both the signs and symptoms of DED.
8. Neurosensory Abnormalities
In its new definition of DED [8], DEWS II introduced the concept of neurosensory abnormalities,
emphasizing the central role of the corneal nerves and the neurosensory loop driven by the trigeminal
pathway. The role played by corneal innervation has extensive consequences in terms of neurotrophic
balance, the regulation of tear secretion and ocular surface inflammation, with the emerging concepts
of neuroimmune synapse or neurogenic inflammation illustrating the interactions between the immune
system and the trigeminal pathway.
The human cornea is densely innervated by the sensory fibers of the trigeminal nerve,
with relatively few nerve bundles penetrating the cornea, but, also, a very dense network of
intraepithelial nerve endings with a variety of mechanical, chemical and thermal receptors [52].
Corneal nerves also play a major role in controlling lacrimal gland secretion, thus regulating tear
volume and composition through the trigeminal–facial nerve loop.
Neurosensory abnormalities in the ocular surface may participate in three different but closely
related mechanisms in DED, which may act as initiators or consequences of the disease—namely,
neurogenic inflammation, neuropathic pain and neurotrophic keratopathy.
Neurogenic inflammation is a key factor of the vicious cycle involved in DED [138];
neuropathic pain and neurotrophic keratopathy may explain the frequent discrepancies between
DED signs and symptoms, with corneal hypoesthesia leading to the paradoxical condition of a
highly damaged cornea with few or no symptoms, whereas neuropathic pain corresponds to highly
symptomatic patients despite no, or barely detectable, corneal damage.
As a causative role in DED, alterations of the corneal innervation loop are primary mechanisms of
a wide variety of conditions—among them, corneal refractive surgery, where DED has become the most
frequent and disabling complication. Most causes are iatrogenic. However, structural and functional
alterations of the sub-basal corneal nerves were identified in other types of DED, with reduced nerve
density and branching, increased tortuosity, bead-like patterns, greater nerve width and aspects
of neuromas, a pattern that would appear more closely associated with neuropathic pain [139,140].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 12 of 24
The reduction in nerve density was highly correlated with an increased density of inflammatory cells
and the ocular surface disease index, illustrating the close relationships between nerves, symptoms and
corneal inflammation [141].
A key role of sustained neural stimulation in response to increased osmolarity, epithelial alterations
and mechanical stress is the release of proinflammatory neuropeptides by the nerve endings, leading to
neurogenic inflammation, a prominent mechanism of DED.
However, some patients do not show significant tissue damage that would explain their high
levels of symptoms. This raises the concept of neuropathic pain, where the symptoms may resemble
those of DED, and the signs are mostly limited or only associated with mild tear abnormalities or
subclinical changes or are only detectable using confocal microscopy or impression cytology through the
expression of tear or conjunctival biomarkers of inflammation [140,142,143]. DED and neuropathic pain
often have similarities in their development [144], but the continuous firing of corneal nerve receptors
may result in a lowered stimulatory threshold. This is typically experienced as persistent irritation or
pain in response to a normally innocuous stimulation—namely, allodynia and/or increased impulse
transmission following suprathreshold stimulation, with abnormally increased pain sensation—namely,
hyperalgesia [52].
When stimulation persists, patients may progressively develop mechanisms of central neuronal
sensitization within the trigeminal complex in the brainstem and, in higher-order neurons in the brain,
leading to neuropathic pain symptoms [52,145,146]. Chronic neuropathic pain persists irrespective
of the ocular surface findings and initial mechanisms, thus resisting etiologic or symptomatic
treatments [52,145]. Indeed, a significant part of these cases are associated with depression or
anxiety and may also involve patients with a general pain syndrome. Small fiber neuropathy has been
frequently associated with Sjögren’s syndrome, and a patient’s general condition should be addressed
for holistic patient care [147].
Conversely, an opposite condition may be observed in DED when chronic damage to corneal
nerves may cause decreased sensitivity of the cornea, with low levels of symptoms despite a highly
damaged ocular surface. This might explain one aspect of the well-known sign/symptom discrepancy in
DED, but, additionally, the neurotrophic consequences of nerve abnormalities may participate in highly
aggravating corneal damage. Indeed, even if nerve transection is mostly transient in DED induced
by refractive surgery, sustained anatomical or functional nerve dysfunction deprive the cornea of
neurotrophic factors and prevent the corneal epithelium from recovering and, in the most severe cases,
leading to a neurotrophic keratopathy. Decreased corneal sensitivity has been observed in patients
with high variability, but there is a significant correlation with disease severity, indicating progressive
corneal nerve damage and/or dysfunction in a chronically damaged ocular surface [148].
Three stages of neurotrophic keratopathy have been described [149], and the features observed in
stage 1 are very similar to those of severe DED. Patients may present with painless sensations or few
symptoms, despite damaged corneas. However, symptoms driven by conjunctival inflammation or
hyperactive nerve fibers may mask localized areas where the cornea is anesthetized, which may lead to
the delay or underestimation of the neuropathic mechanisms. In this case, inappropriate treatment can
lead to more severe damage and the involvement of deeper layers of the cornea. Therefore, an assessment
of corneal sensitivity is required for weakly symptomatic patients with corneal epitheliopathy or
epithelial damage resisting adapted therapies [150].
From the clinical point of view, neurosensory abnormalities play multiple roles in DED, as the
primary source of disabling symptoms and sensations, as well as by disrupting the homeostasis of
the ocular surface, blocking the secretion of neurotrophic factors or stimulating chronic inflammation.
Their role, therefore, deserves much attention, and developments of new therapies can benefit from
recognition of this core mechanism and from further research.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 13 of 24
Clinical Implications
• The human cornea is densely innervated and corneal nerves participate in the stability of the
ocular surface. Their continuous stimulation by a disrupted TF may cause symptoms.
• Neurosensory abnormalities may participate in three different but closely related mechanisms
in DED: neurogenic inflammation, neuropathic pain and neurotrophic keratopathy. These may
contribute to the lack of correlation often observed between DED signs and symptoms.
• Neurosensory abnormalities in DED must be studied further but should be considered when
assessing signs, symptoms and treatment responsiveness in the clinic.
9. Implications for Regulatory Science
Novel treatment pathways for DED are being explored with innovative pharmaceutical agents.
Initial studies at the basic research level are followed by translational research, aimed at investigating
efficacy using in vitro and animal experiments. At this stage, it is vital to determine if a newly
discovered agent or molecule has been accepted for medical use in other fields by government
regulatory agencies, so that the requirements for nonclinical studies, including toxicology studies,
may not be necessary.
There are important issues to be addressed when considering the introduction of medical products
for the treatment of DED, including that only a few products specifically aimed at the treatment of DED
have been officially approved by government regulatory agencies. It is likely the result of conceptual
discrepancies between academic science, and regulatory science could account for the small number of
products approved by regulatory agencies for DED. In many countries, approved medical products
are categorized into three major groups: pharmaceutical agents (drugs), medical devices and products
for regenerative medicine. Of those, most medical products designed for DED treatment fall into the
categories of pharmaceutical agents and medical devices and, as such, are strictly regulated by the
laws and/or guidelines set by each government.
Academic research scientists tend to focus on efficacy, while regulatory agencies are primarily
concerned with safety, which is a vital perspective of regulatory science. It is always possible that
patients will unexpectedly have adverse events caused by pharmaceutical agents and/or contaminated
pathologic microorganisms and viruses, illustrating why strict government regulation is important.
In order to assess the safety and efficacy in clinical trials, the primary endpoint should be set not only
from the perspective of clinicians and researchers but should also seek to assess the restoration of
visual function.
In the field of DED research, one of the difficulties is the absence of global consensus between
regulatory agencies on the definitions of TF abnormalities, including the cut-off value for TBUT
and the Schirmer 1 test. Each country has established its own cut-off value (Table 3). Moreover,
regulations for the approval of DED products in clinical trials vary between the US, the EU and Japan
(Table 4) [151–154]. Another difficulty is the lack of an established surrogate endpoint for global
clinical trials.
Table 3. Abnormal values of the tear breakup time and Schirmer I test in each country.
Location Tear Breakup Time (Seconds) Schirmer I Test (mm)
USA Not determined Not determined
Germany Abnormal < 10
Severe abnormal < 5
Abnormal < 10
Severe abnormal < 5
France ≤5 ≤5
Italy ≤7 ≤5
Japan ≤5 ≤5
China 5 < Dry eye disease suspected ≤ 10
Dry eye ≤ 5
5 < Dry eye disease suspected ≤ 10
Dry eye ≤ 5
South Korea 5 < Dry eye suspected ≤ 10
Dry eye ≤ 5
5 < Dry eye suspected ≤ 10
Dry eye ≤ 5
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 14 of 24
Table 4. Current approval requirements in the US, EU and Japan.
Location Sign Symptom Duration of Clinical
Study (Months)
US Primary Any * Primary Any * 3
EU Primary Any * Primary Any * 6
Japan Primary Staining Secondary Any * 1
* These are not specified in the US and EU; however, they must be validated for the treatment of DED.
Several important points differ slightly between the processes of research and development
and those of product development, especially on the equal quality of products. These points
might be essential for future internationally harmonized clinical trials for DED products—again,
illustrating the importance of regulatory science with its requirement for an accumulation of
well-controlled evidence-based data.
In summary, the safety profile of study drugs should be the object of thorough attention.
Real-world data analysis could be useful in such circumstances, following government approval of
pharmaceutical agents, and a rational use of medicine has also been proposed [155,156].
Clinical Implications
• Academic science tends to focus on efficacy; however, safety—a critical consideration for drug
research—is key for regulatory agencies.
• The establishment of a well-organized surrogate endpoint is important for worldwide clinical
research, as currently there is no global consensus on the measure of TF abnormalities in
clinical trials.
10. Conclusions
Many common diseases, including ocular diseases, are caused by the interaction of human genes
and the environment. The numbers of DED patients have increased dramatically in the past decades
(up to 30–40% in some populations) [2–6], likely to be predominantly caused by environmental changes.
The increase in visual tasks, an aging society, sleep deprivation, impairments in circadian rhythms,
lack of exercise, increase in obesity and sedentary lifestyles could also contribute to the increase in
DED incidence [157–161]. In one sense, DED can be considered a lifestyle disease. Although we have
emphasized the importance of TFBU, the control of inflammation is also important by employing
various therapeutics [84,162–164]. Since the consensus of the National Eye Institute/Industry Workshop
on Clinical Trials in Dry Eye in 1995 [10], the definition and diagnostic criteria have been changing
partially to reflect the changing nature of DED and the causes of DED, in our modern, visually oriented
society where the prolonged use of computers or smartphones is common in daily life. The activities
of society will continue to evolve over the next generations and will affect the characteristics of DED in
the future.
The purpose of this paper was to reach a global consensus among ophthalmologists who examine
DED patients almost every day. There have been alternative definitions of DED in the past, but here,
we proposed a simple definition, with emphasis on the importance of TBU and subjective symptoms or
visual impairment. As stated in Section 2, the new definition proposed is: “Dry eye is a multifactorial
disease characterized by a persistently unstable and/or deficient tear film causing discomfort and/or
visual impairment, accompanied by variable degrees of ocular surface epitheliopathy, inflammation and
neurosensory abnormalities”. We hope this consensus will contribute to the diagnosis of DED in clinics
and aid progress in the DED research field.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.T., S.C.P. and R.D.; active discussion on the definition and supporting
information, K.T., S.C.P., Z.L., C.B., H.M.K., E.M.M., F.K., M.R., N.Y., S.K. and R.D.; writing—original draft
preparation, K.T.; writing—review and editing, K.T., S.C.P., Z.L., C.B., H.M.K., E.M.M., L.L., J.T.C.-G., F.K., M.R.,
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 15 of 24
N.Y., S.K. and R.D.; supervision, R.D., S.C.P. and Z.L. and funding acquisition, K.T., Z.L., H.M.K. and N.Y.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Asia Dry Eye Society and, for N.Y., “Grants-in-Aid for scientific research
from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (Grant number: 16K11269).
Acknowledgments: N. Yokoi wishes to thank John Bush (Dept. of Foreign Affairs, Kyoto Prefectural University
of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan) for reviewing part of the manuscript. Editorial support was provided by Synergy
Vision (London, UK) and funded by the Asia Dry Eye Society. The authors wish to thank Catherine Oshima (Keio
University) for providing administrative support.
Conflicts of Interest: The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses or interpretation
of data; in the writing of the manuscript or in the decision to publish the results. Lingyi Liang and Jimena Tatiana
Carreno-Galeano have no conflicts of interest to report. Christophe Baudouin acts as a consultant for Alcon,
Allergan, Dompe, Horus Pharma, Santen and Sifi, Thea Labs. Reza Dana reports research support from Allergan
and Shire, consulting from Aldevra, Dompe, Novaliq, Kala and Santen and owns equity at Claris Bio. Hyo Myung
Kim reports research funding from Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Shigeru Kinoshita reports grant support from
Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Senju Pharmaceutical Co., KOWA Co. Ltd., HOYA Co.,
Oncolys Biopharma. Friedrich Kruse received financial support for traveling from TRB Chemedica and Santen
and acts as a consultant for KOWA. Zuguo Liu reports research funding from Alcon, Santen, Senju, Yuejia, Xingqi,
Zhuhaiyisheng and Dakai, as well as consultancies and travel grants from Allergen, Novartis, Johnson & Johnson
Vision, Santen, Senju, Yuejia, Xingqi, Zhuhaiyisheng, Reilin and Dakai. Elisabeth M. Messmer acts as a speaker or
consultant for: Alcon/Novartis, Dompé, Kala, Pharm-Allergan GmbH, Santen GmbH, Sun, Théa Pharma GmbH,
TRB-Chemedica AG, Ursapharm and Visufarma. Stephen C. Pflugfelder reports research support from Allergan
and Santen and consulting from Allergan, Shire and Senju. Maurizio Rolando reports consultancies received
from Alcon, Kala, SIFI, Sun Pharma and Théa, as well as travel and speaker grants from Allergan, Bausch and
Lomb, Alfa Intes, Bruschettini, Dompé, Medivis, Off, Santen. Kazuo Tsubota reports consultancies and research
funding received from Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. and Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., consultancies for
Théa Laboratories and Novaliq GmbH and research funding from Wakamoto Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Kowa
Company, Echo Electricity Co., Kao, Rohto and Ophtecs. He holds the patent rights for the method and the
apparatus used for the measurement of functional visual acuity (US patent no: 255 7470026). He holds a joint
patent with Jins, Inc. for moisture glasses. Tsubota is the CEO of Tsubota Laboratory, a company in the dry eye
field. Norihiko Yokoi has received personal fees from Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Otsuka Pharmaceutical
Co., Ltd. and consultancies from Rhoto Co., Ltd. and Alcon Japan Co., Ltd. and patents for the ophthalmologic
apparatus with Kowa Co., Ltd.
Abbreviations
AAO American Academy of Ophthalmology
AP activator protein
APC antigen-presenting cell
AT aqueous tear
ATD aqueous tear deficiency
ATDDE aqueous tear deficient dry eye
BU breakup
CAM cell adhesion molecules
DB dimple break
DED dry eye disease
DWDE decreased wettability dry eye
EDE evaporative dry eye
ICAM-1 intercellular adhesion molecule
IFN interferon
IL interleukin
LB line break
MGD meibomian gland dysfunction
MHC major histocompatibility complex
MMP matrix metalloproteinase
NF-κ B nuclear factor kappa-light chain-enhancer of activated B cells
NLRP3 nucleotide-binding domain, leucine-rich containing family, pyrin domain containing-3
RB random break
RE rapid expression
SB spot break
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 16 of 24
TBU tear breakup
TBUT tear breakup time
TF tear film
TFBU tear film breakup
TFLL tear film lipid layer
TGF transforming growth factor
TLR Toll-like receptor
TNF tumor necrosis factor
Treg regulatory T cell
VEGF vascular endothelial growth factor
Appendix A : Participant List
Christophe Baudouin, Quinze-Vingts Hospital, Paris, France
Reza Dana, Massachusetts Eye & Ear, Boston, MA, USA
Hyo Myung Kim, Korea University Medical Center, Anam Hospital, Seoul, South Korea
Shigeru Kinoshita, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan
Friedrich Kruse, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany
Zuguo Liu, Eye Institute of Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
Elisabeth M. Messmer, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany
Stephen C. Pflugfelder, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
Maurizio Rolando, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy
Kazuo Tsubota, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
Norihiko Yokoi, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan
References
1. Schaumberg, D.A.; Sullivan, D.A.; Buring, J.E.; Dana, M. Prevalence of dry eye syndrome among US women.
Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2003, 136, 318–326. [CrossRef]
2. Schaumberg, D.A.; Dana, R.; Buring, J.E.; Sullivan, D.A. Prevalence of dry eye disease among US men:
Estimates from the Physicians Health Studies. Arch. Ophthalmol. 2009, 127, 763–768. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Uchino, M.; Nishiwaki, Y.; Michikawa, T.; Shirakawa, K.; Kuwahara, E.; Yamada, M.; Dogru, M.;
Schaumberg, D.A.; Kawakita, T.; Takebayashi, T.; et al. Prevalence and Risk Factors of Dry Eye Disease in
Japan: Koumi Study. Ophthalmology 2011, 118, 2361–2367. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Jie, Y.; Xu, L.; Wu, Y.Y.; Jonas, J.B. Prevalence of dry eye among adult Chinese in the Beijing Eye Study. Eye
2008, 23, 688–693. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Tong, L.; Saw, S.-M.; Lamoureux, E.L.; Wang, J.J.; Rosman, M.; Tan, D.T.H.; Wong, T.Y. A Questionnaire-Based
Assessment of Symptoms Associated with Tear Film Dysfunction and Lid Margin Disease in an Asian
Population. Ophthal. Epidemiol. 2009, 16, 31–37. [CrossRef]
6. Tan, L.L.; Morgan, P.; Cai, Z.Q.; Straughan, R.A. Prevalence of and risk factors for symptomatic dry eye
disease in Singapore. Clin. Exp. Optom. 2015, 98, 45–53. [CrossRef]
7. Tsubota, K.; Yokoi, N.; Shimazaki, J.; Watanabe, H.; Dogru, M.; Yamada, M.; Kinoshita, S.; Kim, H.-M.;
Tchah, H.-W.; Hyon, J.Y.; et al. New Perspectives on Dry Eye Definition and Diagnosis: A Consensus Report
by the Asia Dry Eye Society. Ocul. Surf. 2017, 15, 65–76. [CrossRef]
8. Craig, J.P.; Nichols, K.K.; Akpek, E.K.; Caffery, B.; Dua, H.S.; Joo, C.K.; Liu, Z.; Nelson, J.D.; Nichols, J.J.;
Tsubota, K.; et al. TFOS DEWS II Definition and Classification Report. Ocul. Surf. 2017, 15, 276–283.
[CrossRef]
9. Akpek, E.K.; Amescua, G.; Farid, M.; Garcia-Ferrer, F.J.; Lin, A.; Rhee, M.K.; Varu, D.M.; Musch, D.C.;
Dunn, S.P.; Mah, F.S. Dry Eye Syndrome Preferred Practice Pattern®. Ophthalmology 2018, 126. [CrossRef]
10. Lemp, M.A. Report of the National Eye Institute/Industry Workshop on Clinical Trials in Dry Eyes. CLAO J.
1995, 21, 221–232.
11. Pflugfelder, S.C. Anti-inflammatory Therapy of Dry Eye. Ocul. Surf. 2003, 1, 31–36. [CrossRef]
12. Lemp, M.A.; Foulks, G.N. The definition and classification of dry eye disease: Report of the Definition and
Classification Subcommittee of the International Dry Eye WorkShop. Ocul. Surf. 2007, 5, 75–92.
13. Shimazaki, J. Definition and diagnosis of dry eye 2006. Atarashii Ganka 2007, 24, 181–184.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 17 of 24
14. Hyon, J.Y.; Kim, H.M.; Lee, D.; Chung, E.-S.; Song, J.-S.; Choi, C.Y.; Lee, J. Korean Corneal Disease Study
Group Korean Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Dry Eye: Development and Validation of
Clinical Efficacy. Korean J. Ophthalmol. 2014, 28, 197–206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Liu, Z. The preliminary recommendations on the name and classification of dry eye. Chin. J. Eye Otolaryngol.
2004, 3, 4–5.
16. The Chinese Corneal Society. The consensus on clinical diagnosis and treatment of dry eye. Chin. J.
Ophthalmol. 2013, 49, 73–75.
17. Shimazaki, J.; Yokoi, N.; Watanabe, H. Definition and diagnosis of dry eye in Japan, 2016. Atarashii Ganka
2017, 34, 309–313.
18. Uchino, M.; Yokoi, N.; Uchino, Y.; Dogru, M.; Kawashima, M.; Komuro, A.; Sonomura, Y.; Kato, H.;
Kinoshita, S.; Schaumberg, D.A.; et al. Prevalence of Dry Eye Disease and its Risk Factors in Visual Display
Terminal Users: The Osaka Study. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2013, 156, 759–766.e1. [CrossRef]
19. Yokoi, N.; Uchino, M.; Uchino, Y.; Dogru, M.; Kawashima, M.; Komuro, A.; Sonomura, Y.; Kato, H.;
Tsubota, K.; Kinoshita, S. Importance of Tear Film Instability in Dry Eye Disease in Office Workers Using
Visual Display Terminals: The Osaka Study. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2015, 159, 748–754. [CrossRef]
20. Tong, L.; Chaurasia, S.S.; Mehta, J.S.; Beuerman, R.W. Screening for Meibomian Gland Disease: Its Relation
to Dry Eye Subtypes and Symptoms in a Tertiary Referral Clinic in Singapore. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci.
2010, 51, 3449–3454. [CrossRef]
21. Bron, A.J.; De Paiva, C.S.; Chauhan, S.K.; Bonini, S.; Gabison, E.E.; Jain, S.; Knop, E.; Markoulli, M.; Ogawa, Y.;
Perez, V.; et al. TFOS DEWS II pathophysiology report. Ocul. Surf. 2017, 15, 438–510. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Yokoi, N. Tear Film Oriented Diagnosis and Tear Film Oriented Therapy for Dry Eye Based on Tear Dynamics.
Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2018, 59, DES13–DES22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. King-Smith, P.E.; Fink, B.A.; Hill, R.M.; Koelling, K.W.; Tiffany, J.M. The thickness of the tear film. Curr. Eye
Res. 2004, 29, 357–368. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Yokoi, N.; Georgiev, G.A. Tear-Film-Oriented Diagnosis and Therapy for Dry Eye. In Dry Eye Syndrome:
Basic and Clinical Perspectives; Future Medicine Ltd.: London, UK, 2013; pp. 96–108.
25. Yokoi, N.; Georgiev, G.A.; Kato, H.; Komuro, A.; Sonomura, Y.; Sotozono, C.; Tsubota, K.; Kinoshita, S.
Classification of Fluorescein Breakup Patterns: A Novel Method of Differential Diagnosis for Dry Eye. Am. J.
Ophthalmol. 2017, 180, 72–85. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Creech, J.; Do, L.T.; Fatt, I.; Radke, C. In vivo tear-film thickness determination and implications for tear-film
stability. Curr. Eye Res. 1998, 17, 1058–1066. [CrossRef]
27. Yokoi, N.; Georgiev, G.A. Tear-film-oriented diagnosis for dry eye. Jpn. J. Ophthalmol. 2019, 63, 127–136.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Berger, R.E.; Corrsin, S. A surface tension gradient mechanism for driving the pre-corneal tear film after a
blink. J. Biomech. 1974, 7, 225–238. [CrossRef]
29. Yokoi, N.; Yamada, H.; Mizukusa, Y.; Bron, A.J.; Tiffany, J.M.; Kato, T.; Kinoshita, S. Rheology of Tear Film
Lipid Layer Spread in Normal and Aqueous Tear-Deficient Dry Eyes. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2008, 49,
5319–5324. [CrossRef]
30. King-Smith, P.E.; Reuter, K.S.; Braun, R.J.; Nichols, J.J.; Nichols, K.K. Tear Film Breakup and Structure Studied
by Simultaneous Video Recording of Fluorescence and Tear Film Lipid Layer Images. Investig. Opthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 2013, 54, 4900–4909. [CrossRef]
31. Bull, J.; Grotberg, J. Surfactant spreading on thin viscous films: Film thickness evolution and periodic wall
stretch. Exp. Fluids 2003, 34, 1–15. [CrossRef]
32. Zhang, Y.L.; Matar, O.K.; Craster, R.V. Analysis of tear film rupture: Effect of non-Newtonian rheology.
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2003, 262, 130–148. [CrossRef]
33. Sharma, A.; Tiwari, S.; Khanna, R.; Tiffany, J.M. Hydrodynamics of meniscus-induced thinning of the tear
film. Atherosclerosis 1998, 438, 425–431. [CrossRef]
34. McDonald, J.E.; Brubaker, S. Meniscus-Induced Thinning of Tear Films. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 1971, 72, 139–146.
[CrossRef]
35. Yokoi, N.; Komuro, A. Non-invasive methods of assessing the tear film. Exp. Eye Res. 2004, 78, 399–407.
[CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 18 of 24
36. Shanker, R.M.; Ahmed, I.; Bourassa, P.A.; Carola, K.V. An in vitro technique for measuring contact angles on
the corneal surface and its application to evaluate corneal wetting properties of water soluble polymers.
Int. J. Pharm. 1995, 119, 149–163. [CrossRef]
37. Sharma, A. Breakup and dewetting of the corneal mucus layer. An update. Single Mol. Single Cell Seq. 1998,
438, 273–280.
38. Sharma, A. Surface-chemical pathways of the tear film breakup—Does corneal mucus have a role?
Lacrimal Gland Tear Film Dry Eye Syndr. 1998, 438, 361–370.
39. Lee, S.-H.; Tseng, S.C. Rose bengal staining and cytologic characteristics associated with lipid tear deficiency.
Am. J. Ophthalmol. 1997, 124, 736–750. [CrossRef]
40. Mcmonnies, C.W.; Ho, A. Patient history in screening for dry eye conditions. J. Am. Optom. Assoc. 1987, 58,
296–301.
41. Schiffman, R.M.; Christianson, M.D.; Jacobsen, G.; Hirsch, J.D.; Reis, B.L. Reliability and Validity of the
Ocular Surface Disease Index. Arch. Ophthalmol. 2000, 118, 615–621. [CrossRef]
42. Mangione, C.M.; Lee, P.P.; Gutierrez, P.R.; Spritzer, K.; Berry, S.; Hays, R.D. National Eye Institute Visual
Function Questionnaire Field Test, I., Development of the 25-item National Eye Institute Visual Function
Questionnaire. Arch. Ophthalmol. 2001, 119, 1050–1058. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Begley, C.; Caffery, B.; Chalmers, R.L.; Mitchell, G.L. Use of the Dry Eye Questionnaire to Measure Symptoms
of Ocular Irritation in Patients With Aqueous Tear Deficient Dry Eye. Cornea 2002, 21, 664–670. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
44. Johnson, M.E.; Murphy, P.J. Measurement of Ocular Surface Irritation on a Linear Interval Scale with the
Ocular Comfort Index. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2007, 48, 4451–4458. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Schaumberg, D.A.; Gulati, A.; Mathers, W.D.; Clinch, T.; Lemp, M.A.; Nelson, J.D.; Foulks, G.N.; Dana, R.
Development and Validation of a Short Global Dry Eye Symptom Index. Ocul. Surf. 2007, 5, 50–57. [CrossRef]
46. Blackie, C.A.; Solomon, J.D.; Scaffidi, R.C.; Greiner, J.V.; Lemp, M.A.; Korb, D.R. The Relationship Between
Dry Eye Symptoms and Lipid Layer Thickness. Cornea 2009, 28, 789–794. [CrossRef]
47. Abetz-Webb, L.; Rajagopalan, K.; Mertzanis, P.; Begley, C.; Barnes, R.; Chalmers, R.L. Development and validation
of the impact of dry eye on everyday life (IDEEL) questionnaire, a patient-reported outcomes (PRO) measure for
the assessment of the burden of dry eye on patients. Health Qual. Life Outcomes 2011, 9, 111. [CrossRef]
48. Sakane, Y.; Yamaguchi, M.; Yokoi, N.; Uchino, M.; Dogru, M.; Oishi, T.; Ohashi, Y.; Ohashi, Y. Development
and Validation of the Dry Eye-Related Quality-of-Life Score Questionnaire. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2013, 131,
1331–1338. [CrossRef]
49. Chalmers, R.L.; Begley, C.G.; Caffery, B. Validation of the 5-Item Dry Eye Questionnaire (DEQ-5):
Discrimination across self-assessed severity and aqueous tear deficient dry eye diagnoses. Contact Lens
Anterior Eye 2010, 33, 55–60. [CrossRef]
50. Zhao, H.; Liu, Z.; Yang, W.; Xiao, X.; Chen, J.; Li, Q.; Zhong, T. Development and assessment of a dry eye
questionnaire applicable to the Chinese population. Chin. J. Ophthalmol. 2015, 51, 647–654.
51. Seror, R.; Theander, E.; Bootsma, H.; Bowman, S.J.; Tzioufas, A.; Gottenberg, J.E.; Ramos-Casals, M.; Dorner, T.;
Ravaud, P.; Mariette, X.; et al. Outcome measures for primary Sjogren’s syndrome: A comprehensive review.
J. Autoimmun. 2014, 51, 51–56. [CrossRef]
52. Belmonte, C.; Nichols, J.J.; Cox, S.M.; Brock, J.A.; Begley, C.G.; Bereiter, D.A.; Dartt, D.A.; Galor, A.; Hamrah, P.;
Ivanusic, J.J.; et al. TFOS DEWS II pain and sensation report. Ocul. Surf. 2017, 15, 404–437. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
53. Van Der Vaart, R.; Weaver, M.A.; Lefebvre, C.; Davis, R.M. The Association Between Dry Eye Disease
and Depression and Anxiety in a Large Population-Based Study. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2015, 159, 470–474.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Toda, I.; Shimazaki, J.; Tsubota, K. Dry Eye with Only Decreased Tear Break-up Time is Sometimes Associated
with Allergic Conjunctivitis. Ophthalmology 1995, 102, 302–309. [CrossRef]
55. Pflugfelder, S.C.; Tseng, S.C.G.; Sanabria, O.; Kell, H.; Garcia, C.G.; Felix, C.; Feuer, W.; Reis, B.L. Evaluation of
Subjective Assessments and Objective Diagnostic Tests for Diagnosing Tear-Film Disorders Known to Cause
Ocular Irritation. Cornea 1998, 17, 38–56. [CrossRef]
56. Rolando, M.; Iester, M.; Macrí, A.; Calabria, G. Low Spatial-Contrast Sensitivity in Dry Eyes. Cornea 1998, 17,
376–379. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 19 of 24
57. Goto, E.; Yagi, Y.; Matsumoto, Y.; Tsubota, K. Impaired functional visual acuity of dry eye patients. Am. J.
Ophthalmol. 2002, 133, 181–186. [CrossRef]
58. Kaido, M.; Dogru, M.; Ishida, R.; Tsubota, K. Concept of Functional Visual Acuity and its Applications.
Cornea 2007, 26, S29–S35. [CrossRef]
59. Koh, S.; Naoyuki, M.; Hirohara, Y.; Mihashi, T.; Bessho, K.; Hori, Y.; Inoue, T.; Watanabe, H.; Fujikado, T.;
Tano, Y. Serial Measurements of Higher-Order Aberrations after Blinking in Patients with Dry Eye.
Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2008, 49, 133–138. [CrossRef]
60. Kaido, M.; Kawashima, M.; Shigeno, Y.; Yamada, Y.; Tsubota, K. Relation of accommodative microfluctuation
with dry eye symptoms in short tear break-up time dry eye. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0184296. [CrossRef]
61. Kaido, M.; Kawashima, M.; Ishida, R.; Tsubota, K. Severe symptoms of short tear break-up time dry eye are
associated with accommodative microfluctuations. Clin. Ophthalmol. 2017, 11, 861–869. [CrossRef]
62. Kaido, M. Functional visual acuity. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2018, 59, DES29–DES35. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
63. Kaido, M.; Ishida, R.; Dogru, M.; Tsubota, K. Visual Function Changes After Punctal Occlusion with the
Treatment of Short BUT Type of Dry Eye. Cornea 2012, 31, 1009–1013. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Mun, Y.; Kwon, J.W.; Oh, J.Y. Therapeutic effects of 3% diquafosol ophthalmic solution in patients with short
tear film break-up time-type dry eye disease. BMC Ophthalmol. 2018, 18, 237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Kaido, M.; Kawashima, M.; Shigeno, Y.; Yamada, Y.; Tsubota, K. Randomized Controlled Study to Investigate
the Effect of Topical Diquafosol Tetrasodium on Corneal Sensitivity in Short Tear Break-Up Time Dry Eye.
Adv. Ther. 2018, 35, 697–706. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Zhao, X.; Xia, S.; Chen, Y. Comparison of the efficacy between topical diquafosol and artificial tears in the
treatment of dry eye following cataract surgery: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Medicine
2017, 96, e8174. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Koh, S.; Ikeda, C.; Takai, Y.; Watanabe, H.; Maeda, N.; Nishida, K. Long-term results of treatment with
diquafosol ophthalmic solution for aqueous-deficient dry eye. Jpn. J. Ophthalmol. 2013, 57, 440–446.
[CrossRef]
68. Kaido, M.; Toda, I.; Oobayashi, T.; Kawashima, M.; Katada, Y.; Tsubota, K. Reducing Short-Wavelength
Blue Light in Dry Eye Patients with Unstable Tear Film Improves Performance on Tests of Visual Acuity.
PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0152936. [CrossRef]
69. Pflugfelder, S.C.; Tseng, S.C.; Yoshino, K.; Monroy, D.; Felix, C.; Reis, B.L. Correlation of Goblet Cell Density
and Mucosal Epithelial Membrane Mucin Expression with Rose Bengal Staining in Patients with Ocular
Irritation. Ophthalmology 1997, 104, 223–235. [CrossRef]
70. Pflugfelder, S.C.; De Paiva, C.S.; Moore, Q.L.; Volpe, E.A.; Li, D.Q.; Gumus, K.; Zaheer, M.L.; Corrales, R.M.
Aqueous Tear Deficiency Increases Conjunctival Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) Expression and Goblet
Cell Loss. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2015, 56, 7545–7550. [CrossRef]
71. Tung, C.I.; Perin, A.F.; Gumus, K.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Tear Meniscus Dimensions in Tear Dysfunction and Their
Correlation With Clinical Parameters. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2014, 157, 301–310. [CrossRef]
72. Göbbels, M.; Spitznas, M. Effects of artificial tears on corneal epithelial permeability in dry eyes. Graefe Arch.
Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 1991, 229, 345–349. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Wolffsohn, J.S.; Arita, R.; Chalmers, R.; Djalilian, A.; Dogru, M.; Dumbleton, K.; Gupta, P.K.; Karpecki, P.;
Lazreg, S.; Pult, H.; et al. TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology report. Ocul. Surf. 2017, 15, 539–574.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Bron, A.J.; Argüeso, P.; Irkec, M.; Bright, F. Clinical staining of the ocular surface: Mechanisms and
interpretations. Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 2015, 44, 36–61. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Pflugfelder, S.C.; Song, X.J.; Farley, W.; Li, D.-Q.; Stern, M.E.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Apoptosis of ocular surface
cells in experimentally induced dry eye. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2003, 44, 124–129. [CrossRef]
76. Bandamwar, K.L.; Garrett, Q.; Papas, E.B. Mechanisms of superficial micropunctate corneal staining with
sodium fluorescein: The contribution of pooling. Contact Lens Anterior Eye 2012, 35, 81–84. [CrossRef]
77. Pflugfelder, S.C.; Farley, W.; Luo, L.; Chen, L.Z.; De Paiva, C.S.; Olmos, L.C.; Li, D.-Q.; Fini, M.E.
Matrix Metalloproteinase-9 Knockout Confers Resistance to Corneal Epithelial Barrier Disruption in
Experimental Dry Eye. Am. J. Pathol. 2005, 166, 61–71. [CrossRef]
78. Fini, M.E.; Bauskar, A.; Jeong, S.; Wilson, M.R. Clusterin in the eye: An old dog with new tricks at the ocular
surface. Exp. Eye Res. 2016, 147, 57–71. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 20 of 24
79. Luo, L.; Li, D.-Q.; Doshi, A.; Farley, W.; Corrales, R.M.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Experimental Dry Eye Stimulates
Production of Inflammatory Cytokines and MMP-9 and Activates MAPK Signaling Pathways on the Ocular
Surface. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2004, 45, 4293–4301. [CrossRef]
80. De Paiva, C.S.; Corrales, R.M.; Villarreal, A.L.; Farley, W.; Li, D.-Q.; Stern, M.E.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Apical Corneal
Barrier Disruption in Experimental Murine Dry Eye Is Abrogated by Methylprednisolone and Doxycycline.
Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2006, 47, 2847–2856. [CrossRef]
81. De Paiva, C.S.; Corrales, R.M.; Villarreal, A.L.; Farley, W.J.; Li, D.-Q.; Stern, M.E.; Pflugfelder, S.C.
Corticosteroid and doxycycline suppress MMP-9 and inflammatory cytokine expression, MAPK activation
in the corneal epithelium in experimental dry eye. Exp. Eye Res. 2006, 83, 526–535. [CrossRef]
82. Pelegrino, F.; Pflugfelder, S.C.; De Paiva, C.S. Low humidity environmental challenge causes barrier
disruption and cornification of the mouse corneal epithelium via a c-jun N-terminal kinase 2 (JNK2) pathway.
Exp. Eye Res. 2012, 94, 150–156. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Kohanim, S.; Palioura, S.; Saeed, H.N.; Akpek, E.K.; Amescua, G.; Basu, S.; Blomquist, P.H.; Bouchard, C.S.;
Dart, J.K.; Gai, X.; et al. Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis—A Comprehensive Review
and Guide to Therapy. I. Systemic Disease. Ocul. Surf. 2016, 14, 2–19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Pflugfelder, S.C.; De Paiva, C.S.; Villarreal, A.L.; Stern, M.E. Effects of sequential artificial tear and cyclosporine
emulsion therapy on conjunctival goblet cell density and transforming growth factor-beta2 production.
Cornea 2008, 27, 64–69. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Contreras-Ruiz, L.; Masli, S. Immunomodulatory Cross-Talk between Conjunctival Goblet Cells and Dendritic
Cells. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0120284. [CrossRef]
86. Xiao, Y.; De Paiva, C.S.; Yu, Z.; De Souza, R.G.; Li, D.-Q.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Goblet cell-produced retinoic acid
suppresses CD86 expression and IL-12 production in bone marrow-derived cells. Int. Immunol. 2018, 30,
457–470. [CrossRef]
87. De Paiva, C.S.; Villarreal, A.L.; Corrales, R.M.; Rahman, H.T.; Chang, V.Y.; Farley, W.J.; Stern, M.E.;
Niederkorn, J.Y.; Li, D.Q.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Dry eye-induced conjunctival epithelial squamous metaplasia is
modulated by interferon-gamma. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2007, 48, 2553–2560. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88. De Paiva, C.S.; Raince, J.K.; McClellan, A.J.; Shanmugam, K.P.; Pangelinan, S.B.; Volpe, E.A.; Corrales, R.M.;
Farley, W.J.; Corry, D.B.; Li, D.-Q.; et al. Homeostatic control of conjunctival mucosal goblet cells by
NKT-derived IL-13. Mucosal Immunol. 2011, 4, 397–408. [CrossRef]
89. McClellan, A.J.; Volpe, E.A.; Zhang, X.; Darlington, G.J.; Li, D.-Q.; Pflugfelder, S.C.; De Paiva, C.S.
Ocular Surface Disease and Dacryoadenitis in Aging C57BL/6 Mice. Am. J. Pathol. 2014, 184, 631–643.
[CrossRef]
90. Zhang, X.; Chen, W.; De Paiva, C.S.; Corrales, R.M.; Volpe, E.A.; McClellan, A.J.; Farley, W.J.; Li, D.Q.;
Pflugfelder, S.C. Interferon-gamma exacerbates dry eye-induced apoptosis in conjunctiva through dual
apoptotic pathways. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2011, 52, 6279–6285. [CrossRef]
91. Zhang, X.; Chen, W.; De Paiva, C.S.; Volpe, E.A.; Gandhi, N.B.; Farley, W.J.; Li, D.Q.; Niederkorn, J.Y.;
Stern, M.E.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Desiccating stress induces CD4+ T-cell-mediated Sjogren’s syndrome-like
corneal epithelial apoptosis via activation of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway by interferon-gamma. Am. J.
Pathol. 2011, 179, 1807–1814. [CrossRef]
92. Zhang, X.; De Paiva, C.S.; Su, Z.; Volpe, E.A.; Li, D.-Q.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Topical interferon-gamma
neutralization prevents conjunctival goblet cell loss in experimental murine dry eye. Exp. Eye Res. 2014, 118,
117–124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Corrales, R.M.; De Paiva, C.S.; Li, D.-Q.; Farley, W.J.; Henriksson, J.T.; Bergmanson, J.P.G.; Pflugfelder, S.C.
Entrapment of Conjunctival Goblet Cells by Desiccation-Induced Cornification. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci.
2011, 52, 3492–3499. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. Henriksson, J.T.; Coursey, T.G.; Corry, D.B.; De Paiva, C.S.; Pflugfelder, S.C. IL-13 Stimulates Proliferation
and Expression of Mucin and Immunomodulatory Genes in Cultured Conjunctival Goblet Cells.
Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2015, 56, 4186–4197. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Contreras-Ruiz, L.; Ghosh-Mitra, A.; Shatos, M.A.; Dartt, D.A.; Masli, S. Modulation of Conjunctival Goblet
Cell Function by Inflammatory Cytokines. Mediat. Inflamm. 2013, 2013, 1–11. [CrossRef]
96. Tseng, S.C.; Hirst, L.W.; Maumenee, A.E.; Kenyon, K.R.; Sun, T.-T.; Green, W.R. Possible Mechanisms for the
Loss of Goblet Cells in Mucin-deficient Disorders. Ophthalmology 1984, 91, 545–552. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 21 of 24
97. Huang, A.J.; Tseng, S.C.; Kenyon, K.R. Morphogenesis of rat conjunctival goblet cells. Investig. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 1988, 29, 969–975.
98. Roat, M.I.; Ohji, M.; Hunt, L.E.; Thoft, R.A. Conjunctival Epithelial Cell Hypermitosis and Goblet Cell
Hyperplasia in Atopic Keratoconjunctivitis. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 1993, 116, 456–463. [CrossRef]
99. Tseng, S.C. Staging of conjunctival squamous metaplasia by impression cytology. Ophthalmology 1985, 92,
728–733. [CrossRef]
100. Wittpenn, J.R.; Tseng, S.C.; Sommer, A. Detection of early xerophthalmia by impression cytology.
Arch. Ophthalmol. 1986, 104, 237–239. [CrossRef]
101. Lemp, M.A.; Dohlman, C.H.; Kuwabara, T.; Holly, F.J.; Carroll, J.M. Dry eye secondary to mucus deficiency.
Trans. Am. Acad. Ophthalmol. Otolaryngol. 1971, 75, 1223–1227.
102. Ralph, R.A. Conjunctival goblet cell density in normal subjects and in dry eye syndromes. Investig. Ophthalmol.
1975, 14, 299–302.
103. Nelson, J.D.; Wright, J.C. Conjunctival Goblet Cell Densities in Ocular Surface Disease. Arch. Ophthalmol.
1984, 102, 1049–1051. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Pflugfelder, S.C.; Huang, A.J.; Feuer, W.; Chuchovski, P.T.; Pereira, I.C.; Tseng, S.C. Conjunctival cytologic
features of primary Sjogren’s syndrome. Ophthalmology 1990, 97, 985–991. [CrossRef]
105. Murube, J.; Rivas, L. Impression Cytology on Conjunctiva and Cornea in Dry Eye Patients Establishes a
Correlation between Squamous Metaplasia and Dry Eye Clinical Severity. Eur. J. Ophthalmol. 2003, 13,
115–127. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Uchino, Y.; Uchino, M.; Yokoi, N.; Dogru, M.; Kawashima, M.; Komuro, A.; Sonomura, Y.; Kato, H.;
Argüeso, P.; Kinoshita, S.; et al. Impact of Cigarette Smoking on Tear Function and Correlation between
Conjunctival Goblet Cells and Tear MUC5AC Concentration in Office Workers. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 27699.
[CrossRef]
107. Yeo, A.C.H.; Carkeet, A.; Carney, L.G.; Yap, M.K.H. Relationship between goblet cell density and tear function
tests. Ophthalmic Physiol. Opt. 2003, 23, 87–94. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Kumar, P.; Bhargava, R.; Kumar, M.; Ranjan, S.; Kumar, M.; Verma, P. The Correlation of Routine Tear
Function Tests and Conjunctival Impression Cytology in Dry Eye Syndrome. Korean J. Ophthalmol. 2014, 28,
122–129. [CrossRef]
109. Sapkota, K.; Franco, S.; Sampaio, P.; Lira, M. Goblet cell density association with tear function and ocular
surface physiology. Contact Lens Anterior Eye 2015, 38, 240–244. [CrossRef]
110. Chi, W.; Hua, X.; Chen, X.; Bian, F.; Yuan, X.; Zhang, L.; Wang, X.; Chen, D.; Deng, R.; Li, Z.; et al.
Mitochondrial DNA oxidation induces imbalanced activity of NLRP3/NLRP6 inflammasomes by activation
of caspase-8 and BRCC36 in dry eye. J. Autoimmun. 2017, 80, 65–76. [CrossRef]
111. Deng, R.; Hua, X.; Li, J.; Chi, W.; Zhang, Z.; Lu, F.; Zhang, L.; Pflugfelder, S.C.; Li, D.-Q. Oxidative Stress
Markers Induced by Hyperosmolarity in Primary Human Corneal Epithelial Cells. PLoS ONE 2015, 10,
e0126561. [CrossRef]
112. Kawai, T.; Akira, S. TLR signaling. Cell Death Differ. 2006, 13, 816–825. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Enríquez-De-Salamanca, A.; Castellanos, E.; Stern, M.E.; Fernández, I.; Carreño, E.; García-Vázquez, C.;
Herreras, J.M.; Calonge, M. Tear cytokine and chemokine analysis and clinical correlations in evaporative-type
dry eye disease. Mol. Vis. 2010, 16, 862–873. [PubMed]
114. Li, D.-Q.; Chen, Z.; Song, X.J.; Luo, L.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Stimulation of Matrix Metalloproteinases by
Hyperosmolarity via a JNK Pathway in Human Corneal Epithelial Cells. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2004,
45, 4302–4311. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Li, D.Q.; Chen, Z.; Song, X.J.; Farley, W.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Hyperosmolarity Stimulates Production of
MMP-9, IL-1ß and TNF- by Human Corneal Epithelial Cells Via a c-Jun NH2-terminal Kinase Pathway.
Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2002, 43, 1981.
116. Li, D.Q.; Shang, T.Y.; Kim, H.S.; Solomon, A.; Lokeshwar, B.L.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Regulated expression of
collagenases MMP-1, -8, and -13 and stromelysins MMP-3, -10, and -11 by human corneal epithelial cells.
Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2003, 44, 2928–2936. [CrossRef]
117. Chen, Y.T.; Nikulina, K.; Lazarev, S.; Bahrami, A.F.; Noble, L.B.; Gallup, M.; McNamara, N.A. Interleukin-1 as
a phenotypic immunomodulator in keratinizing squamous metaplasia of the ocular surface in Sjogren’s
syndrome. Am. J. Pathol. 2010, 177, 1333–1343. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 22 of 24
118. Epstein, S.P.; Gadaria-Rathod, N.; Wei, Y.; Maguire, M.G.; Asbell, P.A. HLA-DR expression as a biomarker
of inflammation for multicenter clinical trials of ocular surface disease. Exp. Eye Res. 2013, 111, 95–104.
[CrossRef]
119. Barabino, S.; Montaldo, E.; Solignani, F.; Valente, C.; Mingari, M.C.; Rolando, M. Immune response in the
conjunctival epithelium of patients with dry eye. Exp. Eye Res. 2010, 91, 524–529. [CrossRef]
120. Baudouin, C.; Brignole, F.; Pisella, P.-J.; Jean, M.D.S.; Goguel, A. Flow Cytometric Analysis of the Inflammatory
Marker HLA DR in Dry Eye Syndrome: Results from 12 Months of Randomized Treatment with Topical
Cyclosporin A. In Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology; Springer: Boston, MA, USA, 2002; Volume 506,
pp. 761–769.
121. Stern, M.E.; Gao, J.; Schwalb, T.A.; Ngo, M.; Tieu, D.D.; Chan, C.C.; Reis, B.L.; Whitcup, S.M.; Thompson, D.;
Smith, J.A. Conjunctival T-cell subpopulations in Sjogren’s and non-Sjogren’s patients with dry eye.
Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2002, 43, 2609–2614.
122. Tsubota, K.; Fujita, H.; Tsuzaka, K.; Takeuchi, T. Quantitative analysis of lacrimal gland function, apoptotic
figures, Fas and Fas ligand expression of lacrimal glands in dry eye patients. Exp. Eye Res. 2003, 76, 233–240.
[CrossRef]
123. Chauhan, S.K.; El Annan, J.; Ecoiffier, T.; Goyal, S.; Zhang, Q.; Saban, D.R.; Dana, R. Autoimmunity in Dry
Eye is due to Resistance of Th17 to Treg Suppression1. J. Immunol. 2009, 182, 1247–1252. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. El Annan, J.; Chauhan, S.K.; Ecoiffier, T.; Zhang, Q.; Saban, D.R.; Dana, R. Characterization of Effector T Cells
in Dry Eye Disease. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2009, 50, 3802–3807. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
125. Yoon, K.C.; Park, C.-S.; You, I.-C.; Choi, H.-J.; Lee, K.-H.; Im, S.-K.; Park, H.-Y.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Expression of
CXCL9, -10, -11, and CXCR3 in the Tear Film and Ocular Surface of Patients with Dry Eye Syndrome. Investig.
Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2010, 51, 643–650. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
126. Gulati, A.; Sacchetti, M.; Bonini, S.; Dana, M.R. Chemokine Receptor CCR5 Expression in Conjunctival
Epithelium of Patients With Dry Eye Syndrome. Arch. Ophthalmol. 2006, 124, 710–716. [CrossRef]
127. Mills, K.H.G. Induction, function and regulation of IL-17-producing T cells. Eur. J. Immunol. 2008, 38,
2636–2649. [CrossRef]
128. De Paiva, C.S.; Chotikavanich, S.; Pangelinan, S.B.; Pitcher, J.D.; Fang, B.; Zheng, X.; Ma, P.; Farley, W.J.;
Siemasko, K.F.; Niederkorn, J.Y.; et al. IL-17 disrupts corneal barrier following desiccating stress.
Mucosal Immunol. 2009, 2, 243–253. [CrossRef]
129. Kang, M.H.; Kim, M.K.; Lee, H.J.; Lee, H.I.; Wee, W.R.; Lee, J.H. Interleukin-17 in Various Ocular Surface
Inflammatory Diseases. J. Korean Med. Sci. 2011, 26, 938–944. [CrossRef]
130. Goyal, S.; Chauhan, S.K.; El Annan, J.; Nallasamy, N.; Zhang, Q.; Dana, R. Evidence of corneal
lymphangiogenesis in dry eye disease: A potential link to adaptive immunity? Arch. Ophthalmol. 2010, 128,
819–824. [CrossRef]
131. Chauhan, S.K.; Jin, Y.; Goyal, S.; Lee, H.S.; Fuchsluger, T.A.; Lee, H.K.; Dana, R. A novel pro-lymphangiogenic
function for Th17/IL-17. Blood 2011, 118, 4630–4634. [CrossRef]
132. Chen, Y.; Chauhan, S.K.; Shao, C.; Omoto, M.; Inomata, T.; Dana, R. IFN-gamma-Expressing Th17 Cells
Are Required for Development of Severe Ocular Surface Autoimmunity. J. Immunol. 2017, 199, 1163–1169.
[CrossRef]
133. Chen, Y.; Chauhan, S.K.; Lee, H.S.; Saban, D.R.; Dana, R. Chronic dry eye disease is principally mediated by
effector memory Th17 cells. Mucosal Immunol. 2014, 7, 38–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Chen, Y.; Chauhan, S.K.; Tan, X.; Dana, R. Interleukin-7 and -15 maintain pathogenic memory Th17 cells in
autoimmunity. J. Autoimmun. 2016, 77, 96–103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Siemasko, K.F.; Gao, J.; Calder, V.L.; Hanna, R.; Calonge, M.; Pflugfelder, S.C.; Niederkorn, J.Y.; Stern, M.E.
In Vitro Expanded CD4+CD25+Foxp3+Regulatory T Cells Maintain a Normal Phenotype and Suppress
Immune-Mediated Ocular Surface Inflammation. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2008, 49, 5434–5440.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. McDermott, A.M.; Perez, V.; Huang, A.J.W.; Pflugfelder, S.C.; Stern, M.E.; Baudouin, C.; Beuerman, R.W.;
Burns, A.R.; Calder, V.L.; Calonge, M.; et al. Pathways of corneal and ocular surface inflammation:
A perspective from the cullen symposium. Ocul. Surf. 2005, 3, S131. [CrossRef]
137. Barabino, S.; Chen, Y.; Chauhan, S.; Dana, R. Ocular surface immunity: Homeostatic mechanisms and their
disruption in dry eye disease. Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 2012, 31, 271–285. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 23 of 24
138. Baudouin, C.; Aragona, P.; Messmer, E.M.; Tomlinson, A.; Calonge, M.; Boboridis, K.G.; Akova, Y.A.;
Geerling, G.; Labetoulle, M.; Rolando, M. Role of Hyperosmolarity in the Pathogenesis and Management of
Dry Eye Disease: Proceedings of the OCEAN Group Meeting. Ocul. Surf. 2013, 11, 246–258. [CrossRef]
139. Labbé, A.; Liang, Q.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Xu, L.; Baudouin, C.; Sun, X. Corneal Nerve Structure and Function
in Patients With Non-Sjögren Dry Eye: Clinical Correlations. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2013, 54, 5144–5150.
[CrossRef]
140. Hamrah, Y.Q.P.; Qazi, Y.; Shahatit, B.; Dastjerdi, M.H.; Pavan-Langston, D.; Jacobs, D.S.; Rosenthal, P.
Corneal Nerve and Epithelial Cell Alterations in Corneal Allodynia: An In Vivo Confocal Microscopy Case
Series. Ocul. Surf. 2017, 15, 139–151. [CrossRef]
141. Tepelus, T.C.; Chiu, G.B.; Huang, J.; Huang, P.; Sadda, S.R.; Irvine, J.; Lee, O.L. Correlation between corneal
innervation and inflammation evaluated with confocal microscopy and symptomatology in patients with dry
eye syndromes: A preliminary study. Graefe Arch. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 2017, 255, 1771–1778. [CrossRef]
142. Wei, Y.; Gadaria-Rathod, N.; Epstein, S.; Asbell, P.A. Tear Cytokine Profile as a Noninvasive Biomarker of
Inflammation for Ocular Surface Diseases: Standard Operating Procedures. Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci.
2013, 54, 8327–8336. [CrossRef]
143. Brignole-Baudouin, F.; Riancho, L.; Ismail, D.; Deniaud, M.; Amrane, M.; Baudouin, C. Correlation Between
the Inflammatory Marker HLA-DR and Signs and Symptoms in Moderate to Severe Dry Eye Disease.
Investig. Opthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2017, 58, 2438–2448. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
144. Galor, A.; Moein, H.-R.; Lee, C.; Rodriguez, A.; Felix, E.R.; Sarantopoulos, K.D.; Levitt, R.C. Neuropathic
pain and dry eye. Ocul. Surf. 2018, 16, 31–44. [CrossRef]
145. Galor, A.; Levitt, R.C.; Felix, E.R.; Martin, E.R.; Sarantopoulos, C. Neuropathic ocular pain: An important yet
underevaluated feature of dry eye. Eye 2015, 29, 301–312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
146. Launay, P.-S.; Reboussin, E.; Liang, H.; Kessal, K.; Godefroy, D.; Rostene, W.; Sahel, J.-A.; Baudouin, C.;
Parsadaniantz, S.M.; Goazigo, A.R.-L. Ocular inflammation induces trigeminal pain, peripheral and central
neuroinflammatory mechanisms. Neurobiol. Dis. 2016, 88, 16–28. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
147. Indart, S.; Hugon, J.; Guillausseau, P.J.; Gilbert, A.; Dumurgier, J.; Paquet, C.; Sene, D. Impact of pain on
cognitive functions in primary Sjogren syndrome with small fiber neuropathy: 10 cases and a literature
review. Medicine 2017, 96, e6384. [CrossRef]
148. Nepp, J.; Wirth, M. Fluctuations of Corneal Sensitivity in Dry Eye Syndromes—A Longitudinal Pilot Study.
Cornea 2015, 34, 1221–1226. [CrossRef]
149. Mackie, I. Neuroparalytic Keratitis. In Current Ocular Therapy; W.B. Saunders: Philadelphia, PA, USA, 1995;
pp. 452–454.
150. Dua, H.S.; Said, D.G.; Messmer, E.M.; Rolando, M.; Del Castillo, J.M.B.; Hossain, P.; Shortt, A.J.; Geerling, G.;
Nubile, M.; Figueiredo, F.C.; et al. Neurotrophic keratopathy. Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 2018, 66, 107–131.
[CrossRef]
151. EMA. EU Regulatory Workshop—Ophthalmology—Summary and Report. Clinical Development, Scientific Advice
and Paediatric Investigation Plans; EMA/450332/2012; EMA: London, UK, 2012.
152. PMDA. Diquas Eye Drops; PMDA: Tokyo, Japan, 2010.
153. PMDA. Mucosta Eye Drops; PMDA: Tokyo, Japan, 2011.
154. CDER. Summary Review Xiidra Eye Drops (Lifitegrast Ophthalmic Solution) 5%; Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research: Silver Spring, MD, USA, 2016.
155. Kondo, T. Rational Medicine Initiative; PMDA: Tokyo, Japan, 2017.
156. WHO. The Pursuit of Responsible Use of Medicines: Sharing and Learning from Country Experiences;
WHO/EMP/March/2012.3; World Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2012.
157. Uchino, M.; Dogru, M.; Yagi, Y.; Goto, E.; Tomita, M.; Kon, T.; Saiki, M.; Matsumoto, Y.; Uchino, Y.; Yokoi, N.;
et al. The Features of Dry Eye Disease in a Japanese Elderly Population. Optom. Vis. Sci. 2006, 83, 797–802.
[CrossRef]
158. Kawashima, M.; Sano, K.; Takechi, S.; Tsubota, K. Impact of lifestyle intervention on dry eye disease in office
workers: A randomized controlled trial. J. Occup. Health 2018, 60, 281–288. [CrossRef]
159. Kawashima, M.; Uchino, M.; Yokoi, N.; Uchino, Y.; Dogru, M.; Komuro, A.; Sonomura, Y.; Kato, H.;
Nishiwaki, Y.; Kinoshita, S.; et al. The Association between Dry Eye Disease and Physical Activity as well as
Sedentary Behavior: Results from the Osaka Study. J. Ophthalmol. 2014, 2014, 1–6. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 9271 24 of 24
160. Kawashima, M.; Yamatsuji, M.; Yokoi, N.; Fukui, M.; Ichihashi, Y.; Kato, H.; Nishida, M.; Uchino, M.;
Kinoshita, S.; Tsubota, K. Screening of dry eye disease in visual display terminal workers during occupational
health examinations: The Moriguchi study. J. Occup. Health 2015, 57, 253–258. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
161. Ayaki, M.; Kawashima, M.; Negishi, K.; Tsubota, K. High prevalence of sleep and mood disorders in dry eye
patients: Survey of 1000 eye clinic visitors. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 2015, 11, 889–894. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
162. Coursey, T.G.; Henriksson, J.T.; Marcano, D.C.; Shin, C.S.; Isenhart, L.C.; Ahmed, F.; De Paiva, C.S.;
Pflugfelder, S.C.; Acharya, G. Dexamethasone nanowafer as an effective therapy for dry eye disease.
J. Control. Release 2015, 213, 168–174. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Bucolo, C.; Fidilio, A.; Fresta, C.G.; Lazzara, F.; Platania, C.B.M.; Cantarella, G.; Di Benedetto, G.; Burgaletto, C.;
Bernardini, R.; Piazza, C.; et al. Ocular Pharmacological Profile of Hydrocortisone in Dry Eye Disease.
Front. Pharmacol. 2019, 10, 1240. [CrossRef]
164. Holland, E.J.; Luchs, J.; Karpecki, P.M.; Nichols, K.K.; Jackson, M.A.; Sall, K.; Tauber, J.; Roy, M.;
Raychaudhuri, A.; Shojaei, A. Lifitegrast for the Treatment of Dry Eye Disease: Results of a Phase
III, Randomized, Double-Masked, Placebo-Controlled Trial (OPUS-3). Ophthalmology 2017, 124, 53–60.
[CrossRef]
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
