Special Issue
Definition and Diagnostic Criteria of Dry Eye Disease:
Historical Overview and Future Directions
Jun Shimazaki
Department of Ophthalmology, Tokyo Dental College, Ichikawa General Hospital, Ichikawa, Chiba, Japan
Correspondence: Jun Shimazaki, De￾partment of Ophthalmology, Tokyo
Dental College, Ichikawa General
Hospital, 5-11-13 Sugano, Ichikawa,
Chiba 272-8513, Japan;
jun@eyebank.or.jp.
Submitted: December 2, 2017
Accepted: February 12, 2018
Citation: Shimazaki J. Definition and
diagnostic criteria of dry eye disease:
historical overview and future direc￾tions. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci.
2018;59:DES7–DES12. https://doi.org/
10.1167/iovs.17-23475
The definition and diagnostic criteria of dry eye disease (DED) proposed by the Japan Dry Eye
Society and other countries are reviewed. The first definition and criteria of DED in Japan
were proposed in 1995. In that report, DED was considered a disease of tears, which
subsequently damaged ocular epithelia. The presence of subjective symptoms was not
included in the criteria. In 2006, a new definition proposed that interactions between the tear
film and ocular surface epithelia play important roles in DED. The presence of subjective
symptoms, including visual disturbances, changes in tears, and epithelial damage were
proposed to be major components of DED, and eyes positive for all three components were
diagnosed as ‘‘definitive dry eye.’’ A third version was proposed in 2016, which emphasized
unstable tear films as a core finding in DED. Following this guideline, eyes with an abnormally
low tear film breakup time and the presence of subjective symptoms are considered to have
DED. The current definition and criteria are different from those proposed in other countries.
For example, the recently published DED definition by the Dry Eye WorkShop II (DEWS II) of
the Tear Film and Ocular Surface Society (TFOS) focuses more on the underlying pathogenesis
of DED, including inflammation, hyperosmolarity of tears, and neurosensory abnormalities, as
well as unstable tear films.
Keywords: dry eyes, diagnostic criteria, definition
HISTORICAL OVERVIEW OF DEFINITION AND
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA OF DED
The first comprehensive definition of DED was published in
1995 on the basis of consensus from the National Eye
Institute (NEI) Industry Working Group on Clinical Trials in
DED.1 In the report, DED is defined as follows:
‘‘Dry eye is a disorder of the tear film due to tear deficiency
or excessive evaporation, which causes damage to the
interpalpebral ocular surface and is associated with symptoms
of ocular discomfort.’’
The definition clearly states that changes in the tear film are
the cause of DED, which subsequently cause irritating
symptoms and epithelial abnormalities. It also suggests that
tear deficiency and excessive evaporation are the major causes
of DED. This concept was reflected in the classification in this
publication. DED was divided into two major categories
involving tear deficient and evaporative, and then was further
subclassified into a range of intrinsic and extrinsic causes. It is
important that the definition uses the term ‘‘disorder’’ and not
‘‘disease.’’ This definition and classification scheme have
influenced subsequent DED studies and clinical approaches,
including the Preferred Practice Pattern reported by the
American Academy of Ophthalmology in 20132 and others.3–7
The second major progress was made in the early 2000s, and
the results were published in the report of the International
DEWS of the TFOS in 2007.3 This report states:
‘‘Dry eye is a multifactorial disease of the tears and ocular
surface that results in symptoms of discomfort, visual distur￾bance, and tear film instability with potential damage to the
ocular surface. It is accompanied by increased osmolarity of the
tear film and inflammation of the ocular surface.’’
This definition proposes several differences from the
previous NEI report. First, DED was considered to be a disease
caused by abnormalities in either tears or the ocular surface.
Tears were not considered to be the sole cause of DED, and
changes in the epithelium could cause abnormalities in tears. In
this regard, DED was considered to be a dysfunction of the
integrated functional unit comprising the lacrimal glands,
ocular surface, eyelids, and sensory and motor nerves.8 Second,
DED might cause visual disturbances.9–11 Third, increased
osmolarity and ocular surface inflammation were included in
the DED definition.12–14 Inclusion of these pathogenic factors
in the definition of DED was new and contrasted with previous
NEI reports. The definition caused controversy among
researchers regarding whether the inflammation and hyperos￾molarity had a casual or causal relationship with DED. The
classification system of the DEWS report basically revised the
1995 NEI report, with aqueous-deficient DED and evaporative
dry eye as the major two subtypes (Fig. 1). Aqueous-deficient
was further classified into Sj¨ogren and non-Sj¨ogren categories.
Evaporative dry eye was subclassified into intrinsic and
extrinsic categories, and they were further classified as
resulting from a range of causes.
In a recent revision, published in 2017, dealing with the
DED definition and classification in the DEWS II report, the
following definition of DED is provided:
‘‘A multifactorial disease of the ocular surface characterized
by a loss of homeostasis of the tear film, and accompanied by
ocular symptoms, in which tear film instability and hyperos￾molarity, ocular surface inflammation and damage, and
neurosensory abnormalities play etiological roles.’’4
This definition is basically a minor revision of DEWS, which
used the term ‘‘homeostasis of the tear film’’ to suggest that a
Copyright 2018 The Authors
iovs.arvojournals.org j ISSN: 1552-5783 DES7
FIGURE 1. Major etiological causes of DED proposed by the DEWS of the TFOS 2006. The left box illustrates the influence of the environment on
risk of an individual developing DED. Note that aqueous-deficient dry eye has two major subtypes: Sj¨ogren and non-Sj¨ogren syndrome DED.
Evaporative dry eye is subdivided into intrinsic and extrinsic causes, and can be further classified into subgroups. Reprinted with permission from
Craig JP, Nichols KK, Akpek EK, et al. TFOS DEWS II Definition and Classification Report. Ocul Surf. 2017;15:276–283.  2017 Elsevier Inc.
FIGURE 2. Tests to diagnose and monitor DED proposed by DEWS II of the TFOS.16 The test starts with screening questions for DED, followed by a
series of examinations, such as slit-lamp biomicroscopy, osmolarity, BUT measurement, and staining tests. Then, further tests for subtype
classification, including meibomian gland/lid margin changes and tear volume examinations, are performed. Reprinted with permission from
Wolffsohn JS, Arita R, Chalmers R, et al. TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology report. Ocul Surf. 2017;15:539–574.  2017 Elsevier Inc.
Definition and Diagnostic Criteria of Dry Eye Disease IOVS j Special Issue j Vol. 59 j No. 14 j DES8
variety of factors could influence the homeostasis. The
definition followed the previous one by describing factors that
were important in the pathogenesis of DED, which included
tear film instability, hyperosmolarity, ocular surface inflamma￾tion and damage, and neurosensory abnormalities. Neurosen￾sory abnormalities were included in the definition for the first
time, reflecting recent interest in the importance of alterations
in pain and sensations in DED.15 The classification system
succeeded the recent DEWS II reports with several modifica￾tions.4 The newly proposed classification scheme considered
cases in which patients exhibited DED symptoms without
obvious DED signs, or presented with symptoms that were not
characteristic of DED. The former were cases with either a
preclinical state of DED or neuropathic pain in which the
somatosensory system was affected. The latter was considered
to be related to reduced corneal sensitivity (a neurotrophic
condition). Eyes with both signs and symptoms were classified
as either aqueous-deficient or evaporative dry eye. Although
this part of the classification was basically the same as previous
classifications, there was a slight modification to clarify that
there was a significant number of eyes that had both aqueous￾deficient and evaporative components, so that these two
subcategories were not exclusive.
In the diagnosis report, DEWS II listed a variety of
diagnostic tests, which included questionnaires, tear film tests,
epithelial abnormalities, and others.16 Although the report did
not propose specific diagnostic criteria, it indicated the most
appropriate (efficacious) tests to diagnose and monitor DED
(Fig. 2).
There are other groups that proposed definitions and/or
diagnostic criteria. In 2006, a panel of international DED
specialists established a consensus using the Delphi approach.
In this report, the use of ‘‘dysfunctional tear syndrome (DTS)’’
instead of DED was proposed.17 The report concluded that
treatment strategies should rely on symptoms and signs rather
than tests. The panel defined clinical signs to be considered in
assessing the severity of DTS, which were used to develop a
severity-based treatment algorithm. A major aim of the report
was to establish a treatment algorithm; no specific definition or
diagnostic criteria were suggested.
The Korean Corneal Study Group suggested a DED
definition and treatment algorithm in 2014. In the report, they
define DED as ‘‘a disease of the ocular surface that is associated
with tear film abnormalities.’’18 They proposed diagnostic
criteria involving one or more symptoms (either irritating or
visual symptoms), plus at least one objective sign including
either ocular surface staining or tear film instability.
A European group also proposed diagnostic criteria for
severe DED. In this report, Baudouin and associates19 proposed
that patients with a high ocular surface disease index (OSDI;
>33) and increased corneal fluorescein score (‡3) were
considered to have severe DED, whereas an OSDI <33 with a
fluorescein score ‡3, OSDI ‡33 with a fluorescein score ¼ 2,
or an OSDI ‡33 with a fluorescein score <2 were considered
as severe DED if there were different DED findings, such as
impaired corneal sensitivity, a breakup time (BUT) <5 seconds,
and additional criteria (Fig. 3).
RECENT PROGRESS REGARDING THE CONCEPT OF
DED IN JAPAN
The first definition and diagnostic criteria of DED were
proposed by the Japan Dry Eye Society (JDES) in 1995, the
same year that the NEI report was published. In this report,
DED is defined as ‘‘Ocular surface epithelial damage caused by
qualitative or quantitative abnormalities of tears.’’20 Diagnostic
criteria were also proposed (Table 1). The definition and
criteria had some similarities to those proposed by the NEI
report; however, there were two distinct differences. First, the
Japanese definition did not include the presence of subjective
symptoms, based on the observation that end-stage DED
patients with keratinized ocular surfaces seldom complained of
irritating symptoms. Second, the Japanese dry eye guideline
proposed cutoff values involving alterations in tears (Schirm￾er’s I test value  5 mm, cotton thread test  10 mm, or a BUT

5 seconds) as well as epithelial damage (fluorescein score ‡1
point [maximum ¼ 3] or Rose Bengal staining scores ‡3 points
[maximum ¼ 9]).
The second version of the Japanese dry eye definition and
criteria was published in 2006. In the report, dry eye is defined
as follows: ‘‘Dry eye is the chronic disease in tears and corneal/
conjunctival epithelia caused by various factors. It may
accompany irritating symptoms and/or visual disturbances.’’
This definition differs from the previous version in that
abnormalities in tears and ocular surface epithelia were
considered to be reciprocal, forming a vicious cycle. It also
suggests that multiple intrinsic or extrinsic factors contribute
to the development of DED, including decreased tear
secretion, Meibomian gland dysfunction, and wearing of
contact lenses. The Japanese 2006 report included diagnostic
FIGURE 3. Diagnostic criteria and scoring algorithm for DED proposed
by the Ocular Dryness Disease Severity (ODISSEY) European Consen￾sus Group of dry eye specialists.19 The algorithm addresses the
challenges associated with symptom and sign discordance in some
cases of severe DED, and describes specific criteria relevant to
evaluating DED severity in three different patient scenarios. Reprinted
with permission from Baudouin C, Aragona P, Van Setten G, et al.
Diagnosing the severity of dry eye: a clear and practical algorithm. Br J
Ophthalmol. 2014;98:1168–1176. This is an Open Access article
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution Non￾Commercial (CC BY-NC 3.0) license.
Definition and Diagnostic Criteria of Dry Eye Disease IOVS j Special Issue j Vol. 59 j No. 14 j DES9
criteria of DED (Fig. 4),21,22 which included three categories of
subjective symptoms, abnormalities of tears, and epithelial
damage. The abnormalities of tears included a decreased BUT
or Schirmer’s value, and the epithelial damage included
positive staining scores (‡3 of 9 points) in either fluorescein,
Rose Bengal, or Lissamine Green staining tests. One of the
characteristics of the criteria was that there were two
categories for DED diagnosis, involving definite dry eye and
probable dry eye. These criteria were based on the assumption
that all of the above-mentioned tests were sensitive enough to
diagnose DED. Positive results for all three categories were
sufficient to make a diagnosis of DED. However, eyes could
have DED, even if only two of the three categories were
positive, because the diagnostic tests may not be sufficiently
accurate. It was suggested that the addition of other newly
developed tests would increase the accuracy of the criteria;
however, the committee decided to include only tests widely
performed in general practice. Since the announcement of the
JDES definition/criteria in 2006, it has been widely used by
Japanese DED researchers, and has contributed to the
promotion of DED studies.
AWARENESS OF ‘‘SHORT BUT-TYPE DRY EYE’’
Since the development of the second version of the dry eye
definition and criteria, many Japanese DED specialists have
recognized the importance of the so-called ‘‘short BUT-type dry
eye’’ (sBUT dry eye). This type of DED is characterized by
positive symptoms and decreased BUT ( 5 seconds) without
notable epithelial damage. It was reported that 441 of 561
office workers (78.6%) showed decreased BUT, and approxi￾mately 50% were categorized as having sBUT dry eye.23,24
Previous studies reported that the severity of symptoms, as
well as visual performance and mucin expression, of sBUT dry
eye were comparable to those of typical aqueous-deficient dry
eye.25–27 Although sBUT dry eye was considered to be a
‘‘probable dry eye’’ by 2006 criteria, these findings indicated
that sBUT dry eye should be managed in a similar manner as
‘‘definite dry eye.’’ The importance of sBUT dry eye is further
discussed by Tsubota.28
THE DEVELOPMENT OF A 2016 DRY EYE DEFINITION
The awareness of the importance of tear film instability in DED
has led to a revision of the DED definition/criteria, with a new
version proposed by the JDES in 2016. The importance of tear
film instability has also been shared with other Asian
ophthalmologists. Since the establishment of the Asia Dry
Eye Society (ADES) in 2012, Asian dry eye specialists, including
those in China, Korea, and Japan, have discussed the
development of an ADES dry eye definition and criteria. The
consensus was published in Ocular Surface in early 2017,29
and was basically the same as the report by the JDES. In the
report, the DED definition is, ‘‘Dry eye is a multifactorial
disease characterized by unstable tear film causing a variety of
symptoms and/or visual impairment, potentially accompanied
by ocular surface damage.’’ This definition clearly states that
the unstable tear film is the central component of DED. In
addition, although the presence of subjective symptoms,
including visual disturbance, was also important, the presence
of epithelial damage was no longer essential. The new criteria
TABLE 1. Diagnostic Criteria of the JDES, 1995 Version
Category 1. Abnormalities of Tear:
1. Schirmer’s test I  5 mm
2. Cotton thread test  10 mm
3. Breakup time  5 seconds
Considered to be positive when any one of the tests is positive.
Category 2. Ocular Surface Epithelial Damage:
1. Fluorescein score ‡1 point (maximum of 3 points)
2. Rose Bengal score ‡3 points (maximum 9 points)
Considered to be positive when any one of the tests is positive.
Diagnosis of DED:
1. Definite dry eye if both category 1 and 2 are present
2. Probably dry eye if category 1 or 2 is present
FIGURE 4. Diagnostic criteria of DED proposed by the JDES (2006 version).21,22 The criteria consist of three components: subjective symptoms, tear
function, and vital staining test. Patients positive for all three components are regarded as ‘‘definite dry eye,’’ whereas those positive for two of three
components are regarded as ‘‘probable dry eye.’’
Definition and Diagnostic Criteria of Dry Eye Disease IOVS j Special Issue j Vol. 59 j No. 14 j DES10
were also published along with the ADES/JDES definition.
According to the criteria, patients were considered to have
DED when they had DED symptoms and decreased BUT ( 5
seconds). Neither Schirmer’s value nor the presence of
epithelial damage was a part of the criteria.
As the new dry eye definitions/criteria of the ADES/JDES
report are highly dependent on BUT measurements, training in
the proper use of this test is of key importance. BUT
measurements can sometimes be unreliable if an excessive
amount of fluorescein solution is used, or a solution that may
alter the tear film quality. Assessment of the appropriate cutoff
value of the BUT may also be required. The JDES/ADES report
proposed a cutoff value of ‡5 seconds, whereas the DEWS II
report proposed a cutoff value of >10 seconds.
COMPARISON OF THE CURRENT DEFINITION/CRITERIA
BETWEEN DEWS II AND ADES/JDES
The dry eye definitions proposed by the DEWS II and ADES/
JDES have both similarities and differences (Table 2). Both
definitions share the similar concept that tears and ocular
surface epithelia form a communal environment, and disrup￾tion of the environment results in the development of DED;
however, the core concepts of DED differ. The DEWS II
definition included multiple potential pathogeneses in DED,
including hyperosmolarity, ocular surface inflammation and
damage, and neurosensory abnormalities as well as tear film
instability. The DEWS II report emphasized the pathophysiol￾ogy of DED, whereas the ADES/JDES report emphasized the
diagnostic value of the physician’s observations. The ADES/
JDES report therefore placed the emphasis on ‘‘visible
changes,’’ whereas the DEWS II report placed the emphasis
on ‘‘invisible changes.’’ The differences could have been the
result of the differences in committee members. The DEWS II
committee was composed of both clinicians and researchers,
whereas the ADES/JDES committee was composed exclusively
of clinicians.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
There has been rapid progress in basic and clinical research on
DED over the past several decades, which has been reflected in
changes in the definition and diagnostic criteria of DED. It
should be noted, however, that all of the previous reports were
generated based on expert consensus. Although some used
systematic methods for decision making, such as voting or
Delphi methods, they are regarded as ‘‘authority-based’’ rather
than ‘‘evidence-based.’’ In addition, some of the reports had
financial support from pharmaceutical companies, which may
have influenced the direction of the discussion. Further
progress in dry eye research would generate more compre￾hensive and clinically relevant dry eye definitions and criteria.
The JDES recently proposed the concept of ‘‘tear film–
oriented diagnosis (TFOD)’’ and ‘‘tear film–oriented treatment
(TFOT)’’ (see a later chapter). In this concept, it is important to
distinguish which tear film components (lipid, aqueous tear, and
mucins) are compromised, and subsequent treatments should
be used to compensate for the corresponding abnormal
components. Observation of the tear film breakup pattern may
provide important insight into identify abnormal components.30
This concept is discussed in detail by Yokoi and Georgiev.31
Poor correlations between signs and symptoms in DED have
been a challenging issue in DED research. Many recent studies
have emphasized the importance of neurosensory abnormali￾ties in DED, as indicated in the DEWS II report; however, no
clinically useful method for assessing this component is
currently available. The goal of DED treatment is to alleviate
the patient’s discomfort, so future research should be directed
toward developing diagnostic measures that correlate with the
patient’s symptoms. The current definitions and criteria of
DED should then be revised in accordance with the progress of
such studies.
Acknowledgments
Funding of the publication fee and administration was provided by
the Dry Eye Society, Tokyo, Japan. The Dry Eye Society had no role
in the contents or writing of the manuscript.
Disclosure: J. Shimazaki, Santen Pharmaceutical Company (F, C,
R), Otsuka Pharmaceutical Company (F, R), Senju Pharmaceutical
Company (F)
References
1. Lemp MA. Report of the National Eye Institute/Industry
workshop on clinical trials in dry eyes. CLAO J. 1995;21:221–
232.
2. American Academy of Ophthalmology. Dry eye syndrome
preferred practice pattern—2013. Available at: https://www.
aao.org/preferred-practice-pattern/dry-eye-syndrome￾ppp–2013. Accessed December 2, 2017.
TABLE 2. Comparison of Dry Eye Definition and Diagnostic Criteria Between JDES/ADES and DEWS II
JDES/ADES DEWS II
Definition A multifactorial disease characterized by unstable tear film
causing a variety of symptoms and/or visual impairment,
potentially accompanied by ocular surface damage.
A multifactorial disease of the ocular surface characterized by
a loss of homeostasis of the tear film, and accompanied by
ocular symptoms, in which tear film instability and
hyperosmolarity, ocular surface inflammation and damage,
and neurosensory abnormalities play etiological roles.
Criteria Presence of subjective symptom
plus
BUT <5 seconds
Positive symptomatology (Dry Eye Questionnaire-5 >5 or
OSDI >13),
plus
noninvasive BUT <10 seconds,
or
Osmolarity >308 mOsm/L or interocular difference >8
mOsm/L,
or
Ocular surface staining (>5 corneal spots, >9 conjunctival
spots, or lid margin)
Definition and Diagnostic Criteria of Dry Eye Disease IOVS j Special Issue j Vol. 59 j No. 14 j DES11
3. Tear Film & Ocular Surface Society. The definition and
classification of dry eye disease: report of the Definition and
Classification Subcommittee of the International Dry Eye
Workshop (2007). Ocul Surf. 2007;5:75–92.
4. Craig JP, Nichols KK, Akpek EK, et al. TFOS DEWS II definition
and classification report. Ocul Surf. 2017;15:276–283.
5. Bron AJ, Tiffany JM. The contribution of meibomian disease to
dry eye. Ocul Surf. 2004;2:149–165.
6. Lemp MA. Evaluation and differential diagnosis of keratocon￾junctivitis sicca. J Rheumatol Suppl. 2000;61:11–14.
7. Sullivan DA, Sullivan BD, Evans JE, et al. Androgen deficiency,
Meibomian gland dysfunction, and evaporative dry eye. Ann
N Y Acad Sci. 2002;966:211–222.
8. Stern ME, Beuerman RW, Fox RI, Gao J, Mircheff AK,
Pflugfelder SC. The pathology of dry eye: the interaction
between the ocular surface and lacrimal glands. Cornea.
1998;17:584–589.
9. Goto E, Yagi Y, Matsumoto Y, Tsubota K. Impaired functional
visual acuity of dry eye patients. Am J Ophthalmol. 2002;133:
181–186.
10. Liu Z, Pflugfelder SC. Corneal surface regularity and the effect
of artificial tears in aqueous tear deficiency. Ophthalmology.
1999;106:939–943.
11. Rieger G. The importance of the precorneal tear film for the
quality of optical imaging. Br J Ophthalmol. 1992;76:157–
158.
12. Murube J. Tear osmolarity. Ocul Surf. 2006;4:62–73.
13. Pflugfelder SC, Jones D, Ji Z, Afonso A, Monroy D. Altered
cytokine balance in the tear fluid and conjunctiva of patients
with Sj¨ogren’s syndrome keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Curr Eye
Res. 1999;19:201–211.
14. Tomlinson A, Khanal S, Ramaesh K, Diaper C, McFadyen A.
Tear film osmolarity: determination of a referent for dry eye
diagnosis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006;47:4309–4315.
15. Belmonte C, Nichols JJ, Cox SM, et al. TFOS DEWS II pain and
sensation report. Ocul Surf. 2017;15:404–437.
16. Wolffsohn JS, Arita R, Chalmers R, et al. TFOS DEWS II
diagnostic methodology report. Ocul Surf. 2017;15:539–574.
17. Behrens A, Doyle JJ, Stern L, et al. Dysfunctional tear
syndrome: a Delphi approach to treatment recommendations.
Cornea. 2006;25:900–907.
18. Hyon JY, Kim HM, Lee D, et al. Korean guidelines for the
diagnosis and management of dry eye: development and
validation of clinical efficacy. Korean J Ophthalmol. 2014;28:
197–206.
19. Baudouin C, Aragona P, Van Setten G, et al. Diagnosing the
severity of dry eye: a clear and practical algorithm. Br J
Ophthalmol. 2014;98:1168–1176.
20. Shimazaki J. Definition and diagnostic criteria of dry eye [in
Japanese]. Ganka. 1995;37:765–770.
21. Uchino M, Yokoi N, Uchino Y, et al. Prevalence of dry eye
disease and its risk factors in visual display terminal users: the
Osaka study. Am J Ophthalmol. 2013;156:759–766.
22. Shimazaki J; Japanese Dry Eye Society. Definition and
diagnosis of dry eye 2006 [in Japanese]. Atarashii Ganka.
2007;24:181–184.
23. Uchino M, Schaumberg DA, Dogru M, et al. Prevalence of dry
eye disease among Japanese visual display terminal users.
Ophthalmology. 2008;115:1982–1988.
24. Yokoi N, Uchino M, Uchino Y, et al. Importance of tear film
instability in dry eye disease in office workers using visual
display terminals: the Osaka study. Am J Ophthalmol. 2015;
159:748–754.
25. Kaido M, Ishida R, Dogru M, Tsubota K. Visual function
changes after punctal occlusion with the treatment of short
BUT type of dry eye. Cornea. 2012;31:1009–1013.
26. Koh S, Maeda N, Hori Y, et al. Effects of suppression of
blinking on quality of vision in borderline cases of evaporative
dry eye. Cornea. 2008;27:275–278.
27. Shimazaki-Den S, Dogru M, Higa K, Shimazaki J. Symptoms,
visual function, and mucin expression of eyes with tear film
instability. Cornea. 2013;32:1211–1218.
28. Tsubota K. Short tear film breakup time–type dry eye. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2018;59:DES64–DES70.
29. Tsubota K, Yokoi N, Shimazaki J, et al. New perspectives on
dry eye definition and diagnosis: a consensus report by the
Asia Dry Eye Society. Ocul Surf. 2016;15:65–76.
30. Yokoi N, Georgiev GA, Kato H, et al. Classification of
fluorescein breakup patterns: a novel method of differential
diagnosis for dry eye. Am J Ophthalmol. 2017;180:72–85.
31. Yokoi N, Georgiev GA. Tear film–oriented diagnosis and tear
film–oriented therapy for dry eye based on tear film dynamics.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2018;59:DES13–DES22.
Definition and Diagnostic Criteria of Dry Eye Disease IOVS j Special Issue j Vol. 59 j No. 14 j DES12
