International Journal of
Molecular Sciences
Review
Dry Eye Management: Targeting the Ocular
Surface Microenvironment
Xiaobo Zhang 1,2,3,4, Vimalin Jeyalatha M 1,2,4, Yangluowa Qu 1,2,4, Xin He 1,2,4
,
Shangkun Ou 1,2,4, Jinghua Bu 1,2,4, Changkai Jia 1,2,4, Junqi Wang 1,2,4, Han Wu 1,2,4
,
Zuguo Liu 1,2,3,4 and Wei Li 1,2,3,4,*
1 Eye Institute of Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China; xiaoboz@xmu.edu.cn (X.Z.);
mvimalin@gmail.com (V.J.M.); quyangluowa@126.com (Y.Q.); hexin19921016@163.com (X.H.);
Shangkun_Ou@126.com (S.O.); bujinghua2009@163.com (J.B.); ck_jia@126.com (C.J.);
blacwing@163.com (J.W.); xywpwh@163.com (H.W.); zuguoliu@xmu.edu.cn (Z.L.)
2 Medical College of Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China
3 Xiamen University affiliated Xiamen Eye Center, Xiamen 361102, China
4 Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Xiamen 361102, China
* Correspondence: wei1018@xmu.edu.cn; Tel./Fax: +86-592-218-3761
Received: 30 May 2017; Accepted: 24 June 2017; Published: 29 June 2017
Abstract: Dry eye can damage the ocular surface and result in mild corneal epithelial defect to
blinding corneal pannus formation and squamous metaplasia. Significant progress in the treatment of
dry eye has been made in the last two decades; progressing from lubricating and hydrating the ocular
surface with artificial tear to stimulating tear secretion; anti-inflammation and immune regulation.
With the increase in knowledge regarding the pathophysiology of dry eye, we propose in this review
the concept of ocular surface microenvironment. Various components of the microenvironment
contribute to the homeostasis of ocular surface. Compromise in one or more components can result
in homeostasis disruption of ocular surface leading to dry eye disease. Complete evaluation of the
microenvironment component changes in dry eye patients will not only lead to appropriate diagnosis,
but also guide in timely and effective clinical management. Successful treatment of dry eye should be
aimed to restore the homeostasis of the ocular surface microenvironment.
Keywords: dry eye; ocular surface; microenvironment; homeostasis
1. Introduction
1.1. Current Strategy on Dry Eye Management
Dry eye has become the most common ocular surface disease throughout the world. In 2007,
the International Dry Eye Workshop (DEWS) defined dry eye as a multifactorial disease of the tear
and ocular surface that results in symptoms of discomfort, visual disturbance, and tear film instability
with potential damage to the ocular surface [1]. The well accepted theory on the pathophysiology of
dry eye is the concept of lacrimal functional unit (LFU), which was proposed by Stern ME et al. about
two decades ago [2]. LFU comprises the ocular surface (cornea, conjunctiva, and meibomian glands),
the main and accessory lacrimal glands, and the neural network that connects them; it controls secretion
of the tear film in a regulated fashion. LFU concept was broadly applied to study the physiology and
pathophysiology of tear secretion. Dry eye disease (DED) is recognized as a disturbance of the LFU [1].
Current strategy on dry eye treatment is also mainly based on the concept of LFU. DEWS
has tabulated various approaches for dry eye management which includes the use of artificial
tears, anti-inflammatory agents, tetracyclines, puncta plugs, secretogogues, serum, contact lens,
systemic immunosuppressives, and surgical interventions [1]. These approaches are aimed to eliminate
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398; doi:10.3390/ijms18071398 www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 2 of 28
exacerbating factors, support the tear-producing glands, hydrate the ocular surface, restore normal tear
film osmolarity, stabilize the tear film, inhibit inflammation, and eventually restore normal function of
LFU. With these approaches, general outcome of DED treatment has significantly improved in the past
two decades.
1.2. The Concept of Ocular Surface Microenvironment
The ocular surface is a delicate and complex system. Rather than cornea, conjunctiva, meibomian
glands, lacrimal glands and the neural network, other components such as immune cells, matrix cells,
hormones and even microbiome also regulate the homeostasis of the ocular surface. We propose that
all these tissues, specific cells, matrix, small molecules and microbiome interact together to form the
ocular surface microenvironment (OSM, Figure 1). Normal OSM is pivotal for the healthy ocular
surface. Some components of the OSM may not have direct association with the LFU, however, many
evidence show that with the change of these components, the homeostasis of the ocular surface can be
compromised, eventually leading to the dysfunction of LFU and resulting in dry eye.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 2 of 27 
exacerbating factors, support the tear-producing glands, hydrate the ocular surface, restore normal 
tear film osmolarity, stabilize the tear film, inhibit inflammation, and eventually restore normal 
function of LFU. With these approaches, general outcome of DED treatment has significantly 
improved in the past two decades. 
1.2. The Concept of Ocular Surface Microenvironment 
The ocular surface is a delicate and complex system. Rather than cornea, conjunctiva, 
meibomian glands, lacrimal glands and the neural network, other components such as immune cells, 
matrix cells, hormones and even microbiome also regulate the homeostasis of the ocular surface. We 
propose that all these tissues, specific cells, matrix, small molecules and microbiome interact 
together to form the ocular surface microenvironment (OSM, Figure 1). Normal OSM is pivotal for 
the healthy ocular surface. Some components of the OSM may not have direct association with the 
LFU, however, many evidence show that with the change of these components, the homeostasis of 
the ocular surface can be compromised, eventually leading to the dysfunction of LFU and resulting 
in dry eye. 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of ocular surface microenvironment components. The cornea, 
conjunctiva, meibomian glands, lacrimal glands and their neural network as well as other 
components such as immune cells, matrix, hormones, small molecules and also microbiome interact 
together to form the ocular surface microenvironment which is pivotal for the healthy ocular surface.
Therefore, the foremost objective in the DED management is to restore the OSM to its normal 
homeostatic state. Complete evaluation of the OSM components will aid in successful restoration of 
ocular surface homeostasis. In this review, we try to illustrate the components of ocular surface in 
the angle of OSM, interpret the interaction of different components of OSM, and demonstrate the 
changes of OSM components during dry eye and how dry eye affects OSM components. We have 
also discussed the application of OSM concept in the treatment of dry eye. 
2. The Components of Ocular Surface Microenvironment 
2.1. Tissue Components of the Ocular Surface Microenvironment 
The ocular surface is composed of different tissue components, and all these components work 
together harmoniously to maintain the integrity and normal function of the ocular surface. Here, we 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of ocular surface microenvironment components. The cornea,
conjunctiva, meibomian glands, lacrimal glands and their neural network as well as other components
such as immune cells, matrix, hormones, small molecules and also microbiome interact together to
form the ocular surface microenvironment which is pivotal for the healthy ocular surface.
Therefore, the foremost objective in the DED management is to restore the OSM to its normal
homeostatic state. Complete evaluation of the OSM components will aid in successful restoration
of ocular surface homeostasis. In this review, we try to illustrate the components of ocular surface
in the angle of OSM, interpret the interaction of different components of OSM, and demonstrate the
changes of OSM components during dry eye and how dry eye affects OSM components. We have also
discussed the application of OSM concept in the treatment of dry eye.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 3 of 28
2. The Components of Ocular Surface Microenvironment
2.1. Tissue Components of the Ocular Surface Microenvironment
The ocular surface is composed of different tissue components, and all these components work
together harmoniously to maintain the integrity and normal function of the ocular surface. Here,
we focus on the normal function of different ocular surface tissues and their interaction regarding the
maintenance of normal OSM.
2.1.1. Cornea
Cornea play an important role in maintaining the balance of ocular surface microenvironment.
Corneal epithelium is instantly exposed to the external environment. They resist the entry of noxious
pathogens by maintaining the tight intracellular junctions. The microvilli of the superficial epithelium
aids in the anchorage of the tear film. The highly organized and stratified epithelium also produces
the O-glycosylated transmembrane mucins contributing to the glycocalyx region. The epithelial cells
possess various signaling mechanisms involved in wound healing and also secret enormous proteins
such as growth factors, cytokines, etc. [3]. Keratocytes in the corneal stroma are capable of synthesizing
collagen and glycosaminoglycans maintain the extracellular matrix. Keratocytes also interact with
epithelial cells through secreting signaling pathway ligands. Limbal stromal cells act as niche cells for
the limbal epithelial stem cells thus control proliferation and differentiation of limbal stem cells [4].
Meanwhile, the cornea possess unmyelinated nerve endings that generate afferent nerve impulses for
the lacrimal functional unit. Corneal endothelium acts as a barrier between the corneal stroma and the
aqueous humor in the anterior chamber.
2.1.2. Conjunctiva
Conjunctiva covers two-thirds of the ocular surface from the corneal rim to the lid margin [5].
The epithelium of conjunctiva has the similar barrier function as corneal epithelium; it also plays an
important role in mucin secretion and immune defense. The conjunctival epithelium house the mucin
producing goblet cells and the dendritic Langerhans cells. Conjunctival goblet cells synthesize and
secrete a large family of mucins including MUC1, MUC4, MUC5AC and MUC16 [6,7]. It has been
reported that conjunctival goblet cells are surrounded by lymphocytes and dendritic cells and their
density has been found to change in certain ocular surface immune/inflammatory conditions and it
may be the direct target of cytokines and chemokines [8]. The conjunctiva has resident lymphoid cells,
including dendritic cells, natural killer (NK) cells, B-cells and T cells that suppress [8–10] or promote [8]
immune responses. Conjunctival stroma act as support tissue for the cornea and conjunctiva. Reports
also show that the mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) reside in the conjunctival stroma involving
in tissue repair and modulating excessive immune responses [11,12].
2.1.3. Lacrimal Glands
The lacrimal gland contributes to the normal hemostasis of OSM through secreting the aqueous
tear that includes water, electrolytes, protein, and mucus. Sufficient volumes of fluid secretion maintain
the moisture content of the ocular surface, keeps the proteins in solublized state, act as light refraction
medium between the air and the cornea. The lacrimal gland secretion consists of various microbicidal
proteins such as lysozyme, lacritin, immunoglobulins, and cytokines. The lacrimal gland also posses
the IgA-secreting plasma cells, which protects the ocular surface from invasive pathogens [13].
2.1.4. Meibomian Gland
Meibomian glands are sebaceous glands located in the eyelids. The specialized meibomian
glands are composed of mebiocytes forming the acini that accomplish the process of lipogenesis and
production of mebium. The meibum slowly seeps out of the eyelid margin during the gentle pumping
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 4 of 28
process of blinking. The lipids secreted by the meibomian gland include cholesterol, cholesterol esters,
wax esters, triglycerides, phospholipids, free cholesterol, and free fatty acids. The glandular secretion
with the lipids and proteins mixture maintains the osmolarity, stability and prevents evaporation of
the tear film [14,15].
2.1.5. Eyelids
The eyelids contribute the first line of defense to the eye as they have mobile mucosal lining
which entirely covers the ocular surface. Apart from the physical defense the eyelids are involved in
the uniform distribution of the glandular secretion into the tear film protecting the ocular surface from
desiccation [16].
2.2. Other Specific Components of the Ocular Surface Microenvironment
2.2.1. Tear Film
The tear film can be considered as a special form of extracellular matrix component of the ocular
surface. It is normally described to possess three layers: the outermost lipid layer, the middle aqueous
tears, and the innermost mucous layer [13,17].
The lipids maintain the surface tension, viscosity, elasticity and systematic packing order which
aid the tear film to maintain the ocular surface integrity and reduce evaporation of underlying aqueous
in the open eye. The lipid layer has been hypothesized to interact with the mucin and enhance the
formation of thin aqueous film which spreads uniformly over the ocular surface [18,19].
The aqueous phase of the tear film is loaded with not just water that lubricates the ocular surface,
but contains numerous proteins including cytokines, immunoglobulins, and growth factors thus
considered crucial in cell signaling and rehabilitation of the ocular surface during disease conditions.
The aqueous phase also contains electrolytes and maintain the tear osmolarity [20].
Mucus, produced by the conjunctival goblet cells, is chiefly composed of mucins,
immunoglobulins, salts, urea, enzymes, glucose and leukocytes [21,22]. The mucin layer is in contact
with the epithelium and acts as surfactant by evenly spreading the tear film on the ocular surface.
The soluble mucins interact with the transmembrane mucins to form the stable glycocalyx layer over
the epithelium. The mucin layer harbors the commensals of the ocular surface and depletion of
the mucin can alter the microbiome [20,23]. Mucins that have been detected in the ocular surface
are MUC1, MUC2, MUC4, MUC5AC, MUC7, MUC13, MUC15, MUC16, and MUC17. Apart from
integral backbone: water, protein and lipids the tear film is composed of electrolytes, vitamins and
anti-microbial peptides [24,25]. Compromise in any layer of the tear film can potentially disrupt the
ocular surface health.
2.2.2. Immune Cells
The OSM is shielded by heterogeneous population of immune cells. The immune system is
central to host protection, designed to respond efficiently to environmental and pathogenic insults.
The ocular surface-associated lymphoid tissue (EALT) is composed of mucosal immune systems:
conjunctiva-associated lymphoid tissue (CALT) and lacrimal drainage-associated lymphoid tissue.
The ocular surface immune system is tightly regulated by the coordinated effort of the innate and
adaptive immune responses. The innate immune system is the first-line of defense and functions
to control initial infection and coordinate the adaptive immune response. Antigen-presenting cells
(APCs) activated by a multitude of stimuli may present self-antigen to autoreactive T cells during
the development of autoimmunity. APCs are classified as professional (DCs, macrophages, B cells,
and some epithelial cell types) or on-professional (e.g., fibroblasts) in ocular surface. The adaptive
immunity of the ocular surface depends on the cellular defense, mediated by the T cells, and the
humoral defense mediated by the immunoglobulins secreted by the plasma cells [26,27]. The T
lymphocytes are the residents of the ocular surface which consist of CD4+ and CD8+ cells also known
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 5 of 28
as the interepithelial lymphocytes (IEL). They possess two unique receptors, the α/β T-cell receptor
that aid in antigen recognition. The CALT is also composed natural killer (NK/NKT) cells a major
subset of IEL population. T-helper (Th) cells comprises of diverse subpopulations including Th1, Th2,
Th3, Th17 and Th memory cells based on the cytokine response triggered. Granulocytes are recruited
from the blood circulation during adverse conditions. Environmental insults to the ocular surface
sensitizes the corneal and conjunctival APCs resulting in the production of Th effector cells which
release inflammatory cytokines amplifying the process of immune response and leading to ocular
surface epithelial damage.
To maintain the immune homeostasis, the ocular surface tissues contain a variety of factors
and different subsets of regulatory T cells to reduce inflammation-induced pathology in the lacrimal
functional unit [28,29]. The anti-inflammatory cytokine in ocular surface includes TGF-β, IL-10, IL-RA,
sIgA, etc. [28,29]. Immunosurveillance by CD4+ CD25+ Foxp3+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, γδ T cells,
and NK/NKT cells present within the CALT of healthy subjects may provide protection against
autoimmunity [28–30]. Though the immunopathogenesis of ocular surface autoimmune diseases
remain largely unknown, a growing body of evidence suggest that a combination of excessive ocular
environmental stress and/or immunoregulatory dysfunction, combined with genetically predisposed
factors and/or hormone imbalance provides an environment conducive to activation of autoreactive
lymphocytes. These autoreactive T and B cells are the basis of autoimmune-mediated pathology,
such as DED, Mooren’s ulcerative keratitis, ocular cicatricial pemphigoid, etc. [28,29].
2.2.3. Nerve Supply of the Ocular Surface
The ocular surface is populated with nerve fibers that are derived from the branches of the
trigeminal nerve. They can maintain the action of blinking and tear reflex. Nerve endings secrete
neurotransmitters and nerve growth factors (NGFs) which is essential in maintaining the epithelial
integrity, proliferation and wound healing [31]. The lacrimal gland is supplied with the preganglionic
parsympathetic nerve. The secretion of proteins, electrolytes and water by the lacrimal gland depends
on neurotransmitters (acetylcholine and norepinephrine) released by the activation of either the
parasympathetic or sympathetic nerves [13,32]. Apart from the parasympathetic nerves from the
pterygopalatine ganglion, the mebomian gland is also supplied with the sympathetic nerves originated
from the superior cervical ganglion and sensory fibers originated from the trigeminal ganglion [33].
Parasympathetic and sympathetic nerves as well as muscarinic and adrenergic receptors are present in
conjunctival goblet cells, playing an important role in maintaining their physiological functions [34].
Thus, the innervations of the ocular surface contribute to the major components of the tear film.
2.2.4. Systemic Hormones
The circulating hormones around the ocular surface are a pivotal factor involved in the
maintenance of the ocular surface homeostasis [35,36]. Lacrimal and meibomian glands possess the sex
hormone receptors. The androgens are capable of exerting a significant effect on the gene expression,
protein synthesis, and immune response of the cornea, conjunctiva and the secretory functions of the
lacrimal and meibomian gland [37–39]. Androgens exert an anti-inflammatory role with the synthesis
of TGF-β associated with reduction of interleukin-1β and TNF-α, thus supporting lachrymal gland
functions [40]. Growth hormone also plays an important role in regulatingthe meibomian gland size
and morphology, cornea epithelium migration except for lacrimal gland [41–44]. Other hormones such
as corticosteroids insulin, thyroid hormones and melatonin also play crucial role in the maintenance of
the ocular surface [45,46]. Therefore, the systemic hormones can be considered as important component
of the OSM.
2.2.5. Vascular and Lymphatic Systems
The trafficking of immune cells, fluid balance, vitamin absorption and lipogenesis involves the
role of lymphatic vasculature from peripheral tissue to draining lymph nodes [47,48]. The ocular
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 6 of 28
surface vasculature is mainly observed in the conjunctival, episcleral layers and the limbal region [49].
The normal human cornea is avascular, yet it is nourished by the components of the blood. Arterial
supply of conjunctiva originates from the peripheral tarsal arcades, marginal tarsal arcades and the
anterior ciliary arteries. The blood and lymphatic vessel formation is primarily maintained by the
vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF) [50]. Similar to other organs, uninterrupted blood supply
is required for the ocular surface to mediate the transport of growth factors, immune response and
oxygen supply.
2.2.6. Ocular Surface Microbiome
Microbiota was not considered crucial in maintaining the homeostasis of the ocular surface,
until recently the metagenomic platform was successfully applied to identify various non-cultivable
bacterial genome in the ocular surface. Dong et al. observed 24 genera including pathogenic and
non-pathogenic bacteria in the ocular surface [51]. The microbiome of ocular surface also harbors
viruses such as the herpes simplex type 1, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus and Torque teno
virus [52,53]. Similar to the commensal colonizing the gut and the skin, the ocular flora coexists with
the components of ocular surface rendering immune tolerance and elimination of pathogenic microbes.
Alteration in the microbiome status of the ocular surface can significantly affect the homeostasis
through quorum-sensing mechanisms [54].
A common factor that modulates the microbiome is the exposure of ocular surface to antibiotics.
Long term exposure to antibiotics can influence the reduction of the diversity and the burden of ocular
surface commensals [55,56]. The ocular commensals participate in plethora ways to maintain the
ocular hemostasis [57]. They shield the ocular surface from the pathogenic microbe; the bactericidal
status of ocular surface is enhanced by priming the innate immune response, as the commensals
are source of peptidoglycans; mucolytic enzyme producing commensals are involved in the mucin
turnover rendering bacteriostatic activity of the tear film [58]. Thus, the alteration of microbiome
ecology significantly affects the ocular homeostasis and the shift can also aid in the prognosis of future
ocular surface related diseases.
2.3. Complexity and Integrity of the Ocular Surface Microenvironment
A healthy ocular surface microenvironment, especially a stable tear film, is essential to preserve the
smooth optical surface, epithelial cell health, ocular comfort, provide protection from environmental
and microbial insults. Interconnection between the ocular surface tissues and secretory glands through
the central nervous and endocrine system directs production of the tear film, has evolved a complex
network to maintain ocular surface microenvironment homeostasis, especially tear film stability [2,59].
As aforementioned, the ocular surface is a functional unit composed of the ocular surface tissues (cornea
epithelium, limbus stem cells, conjunctiva, eyelids) and the tear-secreting machinery (the primary
and accessory lacrimal glands, meibomian glands, conjunctival goblet cells and epithelial cells) [2,59].
These elements work together through nervous communication and systemic hormones to maintain
microenvironment homeostasis of the ocular surface [2,59].
The lacrimal functional unit is tightly controlled by neural input from the ocular surface tissues,
especially the cornea [60]. Subconscious stimulation of the free nerve endings rich in the cornea,
triggers afferent impulses through the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve (V), which then
integrate to the central nervous system and the paraspinal sympathetic tract to stimulate tear
production. The efferent branch of the loop extends fibers via the pterygopalatine ganglion and then
to the primary and accessory lacrimal glands, meibomian glands and conjunctival goblet cells [2,59].
Thus, the efferent branch of the loop can stimulate the three major tear film components (lipid,
aqueous and mucin) secreted in coordination, on the ocular surface to maintain ocular surface
microenvironment homeostasis.
Based on our current understanding about the ocular surface microenvironment, we can develop
a unified theory about the integrity and function of the lacrimal functional unit. The fundamental
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 7 of 28
function of homeostasis of ocular surface microenvironment is to maintain the tear film stability.
The lacrimal functional unit acts as an integrated servomechanism. If one or more components of
the lacrimal functional unit are compromised, the entire functional unit can enter the dysfunctional
state [2,59].
Tear secretory function can be disrupted by disease of the afferent, efferent, or glandular
components of the lacrimal functional unit, as well as from ocular surface or glandular
inflammation [2,59]. Dysfunction of components of the lacrimal functional unit results in tear film
compositional change, with decreases in components that promote tear film stability, increases in
tear film osmolarity, consequent inflammation and evaded levels of derivative components [2,59].
Osmotic stress to the ocular surface is sufficient to activate MAPK and nuclear factor (NF)-κB, and to
stimulate the production of variety of inflammatory mediators including interleukin (IL)-1β, tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-α, IL-8 and a number of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) by the ocular
surface epithelium [28,29]. Epithelial-derived inflammatory cytokines can activate immature resident
dendritic cells, and trigger the initial events leading to localized autoimmunity [28,29]. Irrespective to
the initiating point of etiology, once the compromise of the ocular surface microenvironment develops,
inflammation becomes the key mechanism contributing to the cause and consequence of ocular surface
damage [28,29].
The release of inflammatory cytokines from lymphocytes and ocular resident cells can obstruct
the tearing reflex by interfering with neurotransmitter release and the response of the tear-secreting
machinery to the neurotransmitters [2,59]. IL-1β has been shown to cause the release of opioids that
bind to opioid receptors on neural membranes and inhibit neural function in ocular surface and
lacrimal gland [61]. IL-2 has also been shown to bind directly to the delta opioid receptor in peripheral
nerve cells inhibiting cAMP production and thus neural function [62].
In addition to regulating the function of lacrimal glands and Meibomian glands, androgens
have been shown to play a pivotal role in suppressing T lymphocytes and supporting the function of
the regulatory T lymphocytes by up-regulating TGF-β [63]. Thus, sex-steroid imbalance, especially
reduction in androgen levels, may predispose individuals to the development of dry eye and
autoimmune condition affecting the ocular surface [36].
3. Ocular Surface Microenvironment Change in Dry Eye
A single component change can eventually break down the homeostasis of the ocular surface
microenvironment, by initializing the pathological change of DED, and can promote the vicious cycle
of the disease. Therefore, it is important to distinguish the driving force of the pathological changes in
dry eye. To achieve this, complete analysis of history and careful examination of the OSM should be
conducted on the patients. In this part, we focus on the tissue, cell and matrix change in dry eye and
how these changes are related to the pathophysiology of DED.
3.1. The Change of Tissue Components of Ocular Surface Microenviroment in Dry Eye
3.1.1. Cornea
Corneal scarring, opacification, and degeneration are the noted complications of the dry eye.
Desiccation stress and amplified inflammatory response in dry eye significantly alters the thickness of
the central and peripheral cornea contributing to corneal thinning [64]. The imbalance between the
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and the inhibitors of MMPs significantly degrade the extracellular
matrix of the collagenous stroma resulting in corneal thinning [65,66]. Deterioration of the tear film can
result in irregular corneal surface that affects the visual quality. Higher order aberrations are focused
in the anterior cornea than in the posterior corneal surface when the tear interface is compromised [67].
Dry eye is also characterized by reduction of superficial corneal epithelial microvilli, and the conversion
of corneal epithelial phenotype to Keratin 10 positive epidermal phenotype which results in tear film
instability [68,69]. Neovascularization, pannus formation, and ulcers are frequently observed in the
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 8 of 28
late stage of severe dry eye, which may lead to blindness. The density of corneal endothelium cells is
significantly reduced in central cornea in mild to severe dry eye [70].
3.1.2. Conjunctiva
Chronic inflammation of the conjunctiva is commonly present from mild to severe DED. A major
pathological change of conjunctiva in response to deficiency of tear film and chronic inflammatory
response is squamous metaplasia. Goblet cell density also dramatically decreases in DED [71,72].
Conjunctivochalasis, described as lax and redundant folds of bulbar conjunctiva, has been shown
associated with the symptoms and clinical signs of DED by decreased tear stability, pooling of tears [73].
Pterygium can cause reduced tear breakup time thus inducing DED [74,75].
3.1.3. Lacrimal Gland
Dysfunction of lacrimal gland can be induced by various reasons such as aging, prolonged
exposure to visual display, dry environments, radiation therapy, contact lenses, refractive surgery,
hormonal imbalance, ocular cicatricial pemphigoid, Sjögren’s syndrome and systemic disorders [76].
Age related consequence of the lacrimal gland functions is the progressive acinar atrophy, uncontrolled
fibrosis and infiltration of the lymphocytic. Autoimmune disorders such as Sjögren’s syndrome
substantially target the lacrimal gland, wherein autoantigens are expressed on the surface of the
epithelial cells, leading to the retention of CD4 and CD8. The lymphocyte aggravates the immune
response resulting in loss of lacrimal acinar and ductal cells [77]. The autoantibodies also targets and
binds to the M3 acetylcholine receptors expressed on the secretory acinar cells inhibiting the neural
stimulation [78]. Diminished glandular secretion in DED could be due to the impotency of the lacrimal
acinar cells and the ductal cells to respond to the neuroendocrine stimuli [79].
Obstruction of the lacrimal gland is often observed in patients with graft-versus-host disease,
wherein the acinar and the ductal lumen is obstructed by the accumulation of granules, fibrosis and
cellular debris leading to tear deficiency [80]. Radiation therapy used in cancer treatments can lead to
transient or permanent dysfunction of the lacrimal gland due to the apoptosis of the lacrimal acinar
cells [77]. Thus, the primary irreversible changes in the lacrimal gland, i.e., loss of secretory acinar
cells, fibrosis and gland atrophy affects the quantity and quality of the glandular secretion resulting in
severe aqueous deficient DED.
3.1.4. Meibomian Gland
The lipids present in the mebium have an important role in the maintenance of the ocular surface
and fluctuation in the quality and quantity of lipids reflects changes in the tear components thereby
proceeding to evaporative DED. Lipid order and packing in the mebium during MGD is altered.
Over expression of protein and under expression of the lipid moieties reflect on the viscosity of
the mebium expressed leading to obstruction of the gland. Triglycerides are proved to be elevated
in the tear of dry eye patients and are the targets of reactive oxygen species contributing to the
conformational changes in the lipid moieties. The lipid peroxidation markers, 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal
(HNE) and malondialdehyde (MDA) are elevated in case of MGD [81].
MGD is classified into hypersecretory MGD, hyposecretory MGD and obstructive MGD among
which obstructive MGD is considered to be the commonest form. The obstructive form of MGD may
be congenital or may be influence by factors such as age, sex, hormonal imbalance, systemic diseases,
autoimmune disease and topical medication. Progressive obstruction of the ducts due to intraglandular
cystic dilatation, hyper-keratinization widens the duct leading to gland drop out, tear film instability
excessive evaporation, tear film stability, hyperosmolarity, and desiccating stress [82,83]. MGD alters
the levels, ratio, conformational changes of individual polar and non-polar lipid moieties, which affects
the lipid–lipid interaction and the lipid–protein interaction eventually progressing to evaporative DED.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 9 of 28
3.1.5. Eyelids
Reduction in the blinking frequency decreases the thickness of the lipid layer leading to increased
evaporation of the aqueous layer [84]. Age-related degenerative changes, trauma, facial palsies,
lagophthalmus, proptosis or the floppy eyelid syndrome can influence the eyelid laxity resulting in
inefficient and infrequent blinking. Thus, the altered eyelid laxity is incapable of exerting muscular
pressure over the meibomian glands to release the meibum, which results in MGD and DED. Inefficient
blinking also proceed in the accumulation of toxin, pathogen and foreign body as tear clearance solely
depends on the frequency of blinking at uniform intervals. Incomplete blinking affects the uniform
distribution of tear on the ocular surface, which results in shortening of the tear film break up time.
DED in turn will result in keratinization, thickening, neovascularization, and inflammation of the
eyelid [85,86]. Blepharitis is the inflammation of the eye lid associated with bacterial infections caused
by Staphylococcus aureus, S. epidermidis and Corynebacterium spp. Bacterial biofilm and the excreted
virulence factors aggravate blepharitis leading to hyperemic, edematous, ulcerated eyelids, recurring
chalazia resulting in the obstruction of the meibum which contributes to DED [87].
3.2. The Changes of Other Specific Components of the Ocular Surface Microenvironment in Dry Eye
3.2.1. Tear Film
Tear hyperosmolarity, tear film instability, excessive tear film evaporation, delayed tear
clearance, infrequent and ineffective blinking are major contributing factors to the etiology of
DED. Hyperosmolarity is a condition featured by dehydration resulting in increased osmotic
concentration and is characteristic of DED [88]. Hyperosmolarity can usher the apoptosis of the corneal
epithelial cells [89], and induce pro-inflammatory stress to the human limbal epithelial cells [90].
A comprehensive summary of causes and effects of tear film hyperosmolarity in dry eye is provided in
the 2007 DEWS [1].
Tear film instability may be the consequence secondary to hyperosmolarity or may be the
prime event. The factors influencing the stability of the tear film includes reduced tear production,
delayed tear clearance, reduced quantity and quality of the lipid layer, compromised tear components,
ocular surface irregularities and ocular surface inflammation. Tear film instability is the sequel of
a series of events, which initiates from the lipid layer of the tear film. Deficient lipid layer induces
evaporation, insufficient lipid binding proteins in the aqueous phase cripples lipid transport eventually
the glycocalyx layer loses its hydrophilic property due to dehydration resulting in ruptured tear film.
Areas of ocular surface may remain non-wettable due to the disproportional layer of ruptured tear
film eventuating squamous metaplasia [91].
Excessive tear film evaporation is considered to be an important cause of tear hyperosmolarity,
causing ocular surface inflammation [1]. Previous studies pointed out that tear film evaporation rates
increased in dry eye patients [92], typically in association with a loss of integrity of the tear lipid
layer [93]. Meibomian gland dysfunction and anterior blepharitis are the leading cause of the lipid
layer integrity disruption [94]. Environmental conditions, tear film instability, age, sex and wearing
contact lens have been reported to affect tear film evaporation rate [95–98].
Delayed tear clearance increases the toxic cell waste products, environmental antigens and
inflammatory mediator concentrations such as interleukin (IL)-1, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and
MMP-9 in the tear film and contribute to the pathogenesis or aggravate the severity of dry eye [99,100].
Reduced tear clearance would cause ocular surface epithelial changes [101].
Every layer of the tear film has an important role in the homeostasis of OSM, fluctuation in the
quality and quantity of the tear components thereby proceeding to DED. Table 1 summarizes the tear
film components compromised in DED.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 10 of 28
3.2.2. Immune Cells
In DED, the OSM experiences failure of immunohomeostasis, resulting in chronic inflammation.
Inflammatory response in DED is an increscent process which involves: (1) activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear factor (NF)-κB in the ocular surface epithelium
by osmotic stress; (2) release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines including IL-1β, TNF-α,
and IL-8 and a number of MMPS (MMP-1, -3, -9, -10, and -13); (3) up-regulation of MHC class II on the
ocular surface epithelial surface; (4) mobilization and activation of ocular surface APCs; (5) recruitment
of Th1 and Th17 cells to the inflammatory site; and (6) amplification of immune response and forming
of a vicious circle [28,29].
Table 1. Tear film components compromised in DED.
Layers of the
Tear Film Compromised Components Related to Tear Film Instability and Ocular Surface Homeostasis
Lipid layer
[81,102,103]
↓ Cholesteryl esters,
↓ Free fatty acids
Involved in evaporation retardation and possess
surface-active properties
↓ Wax esters Bridge the polar and non-polar lipid phase, exert a condensing
effect, due to the presence of the saturated fatty acid component
↓ Ttriacyl glycerides Act as a buffer system for the phospholipids to resist the surface
pressure changes in the air water interface
↓ Pphospholipids,
↓ Sphingomyelin,
↓ Cerebrosides
Maintains the integrity and arrangement of the non-polar lipids
Aqueous layer
[104–106]
↓ Lipocalin Involved in preventing corneal desiccation by scavenging lipids,
removes fatty acid and phospholipid from the ocular surface
↓ Lyzozymes Act as an antibacterial agent by hydrolysing the β-(1-4)
glycosidic linkages between bacterial cell wall carbohydrates
↓ Secretory Ig A Prevents pathogen adhesion to the ocular surface epithelia,
enhances phagocytosis
↓ Proline rich 4 protein Act as an acute phase surfactant to maintain an antimicrobial
environment in the ocular surface
↓ Lactoferrin Act as an antibacterial, antiangiogenic, antiviral component
↓ Prolactin-inducible protein Act as an antibacterial and influences the cell
mediated immunity
↓ Zinc-α-2-glycoprotein Involved in lipid metabolism
↓ Proteoglycan 4 (PRG 4/lubricin) Act as a lubricant and surfactant preventing evaporation
Mucin layer
[107–109]
↓ MUC5AC, ↓ MUC1,
↓ MUC4, ↓ MUC16
Act as a barrier for pathogens and prevent microbial
colonization, maintains the viscosity and surface tension
of tear film
↓ decreased.
CD4+ T cells play a primary role in the immunopathogenesis of DED. As noted, activated CD4+
T cells are localized within the ocular surface tissues of dry eye patients. Desiccating stress-activated
CD4+ T cells, when adoptively transferred to T-cell nude mice, were sufficient to elicit autoimmune
DED [30,110,111]. Th1 cell-produced IFN-γ plays a pivotal role in desiccating stress—induced epithelial
apoptosis, goblet cell loss, and squamous metaplasia in ocular surface [72,110,112]. Th17 cells
are involved in the secretion of cytokines such as IL-17A, IL-17F, and IL-22 which are associated
with increased MMP-3 and MMP-9 levels and are involved in the corneal barrier dysfunction in
DED [72,113]. CD4+ CD25+ Treg cells are involved in the suppression of the autoreactive T cells
by producing anti-inflammatory cytokines, IL-10 and TGF-ß and suppressing the organ specific
autoimmunity. CD8+ Treg among the subsets of Treg cells play an immunosuppressive role targeting
the corneal epithelial cell disruption and autoimmunity [113]. The NK cells are capable of inducing
damage directly to the ocular surface or by activating the APC through the release of IFN-γ and
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 11 of 28
promoting the production of IL-17A in DED [114]. Dysfunction of regulatory T cells in suppressing
CD4+ T generation is noted in DED [30,111,114].
3.2.3. Nerve Supply of Ocular Surface
The DED corneas are characterized by reduced subrabasal density and altered morphology
(nerve sprouts, tortuosity). This is due to the epitheliopathy of the ocular surface in DED unshelters
the ocular nerves to inflammatory cytokines stimulating the neurotrophic growth factors resulting
in neuropathies [115,116]. The parasympathetic nerve endings release acetylcholine the major
neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft acetylcholine binds to the muscarinic cholinergic receptors
(M3AChR) present on the effector cells to transmit the signals. Excessive levels of cytokines in DED
inhibit the release of acetylcholine from the nerve endings and auto autoantibody blockade of M3AChR,
disturbing the neuronal stimuli transmission to the secretory component of the OSM [117,118].
Moreover, diabetes can cause lachrymal and corneal neuropathy, and ultimately induce the change of
OSM and dry eye [119,120]. Some ophthalmologic surgeries such as refractive surgery and cataract
surgery could cause corneal nerve transection which results in decreased feedback to the lacrimal
gland leading to reduced tear production [121–123].
3.2.4. Systemic Hormones
Hormones play an important role in ocular surface homeostasis. Androgen deficiency could lead
to obstructive MGD with a lack of lipids at the lid margin and in the tear film, an altered lipid profile,
and dry eye symptoms [124,125]. While estrogen deficiency is related to post-menopausal DED by
initiating tissue-specific apoptosis [126]. Thyroid hormones state disorders could also induce ocular
surface inflammation, dry eye symptom and MGD [127].
3.2.5. Vascular System
During immune response the afferent lymphatic vessels and efferent blood vessels occur in concert
to protect the ocular surface. Angiogenesis is the formation of new blood vessels, which involves either
lymphangiogenesis or hemangiogenesis, where in the DED, is characterized by lymphangiogenesis.
Chronic inflammation in DED triggers the macrophages of the ocular surface, which orchestras
lymphangiogenesis by two different mechanisms: (1) the CD11b+ macrophages infiltrate the cornea and
transdifferentiate into the endothelial lymphatics enhancing lymphangiogenesis; and (2) macrophage
activates the NF-κB signaling and promotes the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) C and VEGF-D and associated receptors VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-3 contributing to the process of
lymphangiogenesis [128]. Lymphangiogenesis of lacrimal gland was observed in the experimental
models of DED by the activation of Dll4/Notch signaling pathway and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 α
(HIF-1α) [129]. Moderate to severe DED induces neovascularization of the cornea and corneal pannus
can develop in the late stage of Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Studies on murine DED model has shown
that low-grade inflammation associated with DED can potentially induce lymphangiogenesis in cornea
without accompanying hemangiogenesis [128].
3.2.6. Ocular Surface Microbiome
Compromise in the ocular microbiome is evident in conditions such as DED, contact lens wear,
keratoprosthesis, antibiotic exposure and infectious states. The ocular surface integrity is breeched in
DED, promoting the flora to exert its pathogenic effect and activating triggering the innate immune
response. Prevalence of Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase negative Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium
and Propionibacterium was observed to be associated with DED [57,130]. The alteration in ocular
microbiome in patients with SJS exposes their ocular surface to infection and the risk of predisposition
increases during ocular surgeries. The rate of culture positivity rate of microorganism was observed to
be higher in eyes affected by DED, indicating their opportunistic contribution towards the pathogenesis.
In addition to coagulase negative Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, and Streptococcus pneumonia
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 12 of 28
isolated from eye in SJS exhibited resistance towards second-generation flouroquinolones [131]. Altered
ocular microbiome influence the ocular autoimmunity, impairs innate immunity functions and decrease
the IgA production which promotes the entry of pathogens to the ocular surface [132]. Studies on DED
ocular microbiome are very sparse and poorly understood. The emerging field of ocular microbiome
can promote awareness on the antibiotic policies prescribed post-surgery in DED patients.
4. Dry Eye Management: Ocular Surface Microenvironment Targeted Therapy
The DEWS committee has enumerated DED treatment recommendations based on the severity
levels, and the evaluation of treatment outcomes mainly depends on the subsiding symptoms [133].
However, recent studies reported that there is no consistent relationship between common clinical
signs and symptoms in dry eye disease [134]. Among patients with MGD, the most prevalent form
of evaporative dry eye, asymptomatic MGD is more common than symptomatic MGD, therefore
symptom-based approaches in the diagnosis and management of dry eye may be inappropriate [135].
Based on our understanding on OSM, we recognized that changes of different components rather
than LFU could cause compromise of OSM and result in DED. On the other hand, dry eye will
aggravate the pathological change of the OSM components. Therefore, in-depth investigation on the
OSM components will help us to unravel the etiology and pathophysiology of dry eye in specific patient.
Here, we propose that dry eye treatment strategy may need to target on the specific OSM components
which are compromised in dry eye. Table 2 summarizes the ocular surface microenvironment targeted
therapy for dry eye.
Table 2. Normal function of different components of the OSM, their changes in dry eye, and therapeutic
strategies targeting these components.
Components
of OSM Normal Function Changes in Dry Eye Targeting Therapy
Cornea
Normal barrier function
Growth factors & cytokines
Quiescent keratocytes
Scarring & ulcer
Opacification
Neovascularization
Pannus formation
Squamous metaplasia
Extracellular matrix degradation
↓ Endothelial cell number
Lubricants
Autologous serum
Growth factors
Amniotic membrane extract
Amniotic membrane
Contact lens
MMP-9 inhibitors
Conjunctiva Immune defense
Secrets mucin
Squamous metaplasia
↓ Goblet cell density
Chronic inflammation
Conjunctivochalasis
Autologous serum
Amniotic membrane
Vitamin A
MMP-9 inhibitor
Growth factors
Rebamipide
Gefarnate
Diquafosol tetrasodium
Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid
Lacrimal
Gland
Secretes:
Fluid
Mucopolysaccharides
Electrolyte
Microbicidal and other proteins
Mucin
↓ Aqueous tear
↓ Acinar and ductal cells
Fibrosis
Apoptosis
Inflammation
Lubricants
Immunomodulators
Secretagogue
Neurostimulation
Cyclosporin A
Meibomian
Gland
Accomplishes lipogenisis
Secretes meibum
Maintains tear film stability
Prevents tear film evaporation
↓ Meibum
↑ Tear evaporation
↑ Keratinization
Apoptosis
Inflammation
Warm compress
Lid hygiene
Lipiflow System™
Intense-Pulsed-Light
ω-3 fatty acid
Liposomal sprays
Eyelid
Physical defense
Meibum distribution
Prevents tear film evaporation
↓ Eyelid laxity
↑ Tear evaporation
Corneal ulcer
Epithelial defect
Inflammation
Infrequent and
ineffective blinking
Warm compress
Lid hygiene
Antibiotics
Surgery
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 13 of 28
Table 2. Cont.
Components
of OSM Normal Function Changes in Dry Eye Targeting Therapy
Tear Film
Ocular surface homeostasis
Moistens & lubricates
Transports nutrient & oxygen
Tear hyperosmolarity
Tear film instability
Excessive tear film evaporation
Delayed tear clearance
Compensation of tear
Artificial tears/serum
Tear stimulation
Pilocarpine, Pituitary adenylate
cyclase-activating polypeptide,
Diquafosol tetrasodium, Oculeve
intranasal neurostimulation device
Controlling tear evaporation
Moisture-retaining eyeglasses,
Swimming goggles, Prosthetic
Replacement of the Ocular Surface
Ecosystems, Castor oil eye drops
Regulating excessive
nasolacrimal drainage
Punctal plugs
Inflammation Immune homeostasis
Chronic inflammation
↑ Pro-inflammatory cytokine,
↑ Chemokine
↓ Glandular secretion
↑ Reactive oxygen species
↑ Apoptosis
CD4+ T cells-mediated
pathogenesis
Corticosteroids
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Doxycycline
Azithromycin
Cyclosporin A
FK506
Lifitegrast
Tofacitinib
Fatty acids
Nerve
Secretes neurotransmitters &
nerve growth factors
Controls tear reflex & landular
secretions
↓ Neuronal stimuli
↓ Corneal sensitivity
Altered nerve morphology
Neurostimulation
Nerve growth factor
Systemic
hormones
Ocular surface homeostasis
Regulates meibomain gland &
lacrimal gland
Androgen deficiency
Estrogen deficiency
Thyroid hormones state disorder
Hormonal supplementation
Androgen & estrogen receptor
inhibitors
Vascular and
Lymphatic
systems
Transports growth factors
Immune response
Oxygen supply
Lipogenesis
Lymphangiogenesis
Hemangiogenesis Anti lymphangiogenic agents
Ocular
surface
microbiome
Immune tolerance
Eliminates pathogens
Mucin turnover
Colonization of normal flora
Opportunistic pathogen
Drug resistance
Infectious keratitis
Conjunctivitis
Topical antibiotics
Corticosteroids
↓ decreased; ↑ increased.
4.1. Therapy Targeting Cornea
DED tear film is characterized by down regulation of essential growth factors such as TGF-β, EGF,
PDGF, KGF, and HGF, which are involved in the proliferation and migration of epithelial cells and
in the process of wound healing. Autologous serum eye drops are loaded with EGF, HGF, vitamin
A and fibronectin mimicking the tear film which lubricate and maintain the integrity of the ocular
surface. Thus, autologous serum can induce proliferation, migration, restore the tight junctions of
the ocular surface epithelial cells aiding in wound healing. Application of autologous serum in DED
showed prominent improvement in the tear film stability and corneal wound healing [136,137]. Topical
application of EGF could improve the stability of tear film and the integrity of epithelium [138].
Human amniotic membrane has greatly benefited the ocular surface by releasing bioactive
factors. Topical application of amniotic membrane extract could help in stabilizing the tear film
by maintaining the integrity of epithelium and alleviate the ocular surface inflammation in dry
eye [139]. Amniotic membrane implanted as a therapeutic contact lens is an effective and safe method
to treat epithelial defects [140]. In severe dry eye, application of contact lenses may help to decrease
corneal epitheliopathy, improve visual acuity, comfort, and assist to prevent progressive corneal
epithelial defect [141,142]. The contact lenses also act as a carrier for sustained release of the drugs
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 14 of 28
in ocular diseases [143]. Various in vitro and animal model studies have attempted to synthesize
inhibitors of MMP-9 in treating DED. However, there is no specific approved MMP-9 inhibitor for DED
treatment. Although not a targeted therapy, the anti-inflammatory therapy drugs such as doxycycline,
azithromycin, cyclosporine A and corticosteroid dexamethasone are proved to inhibit the gelatinolytic
activity of MMP-9 [144–146]. Similarly, osmoprotectants L-carnitine, erythritol and betaine are proved
to inhibit the expression and activation of MMPs [147].
4.2. Therapy Targeting Conjunctiva
The squamous metaplasia of conjunctiva epithelium can be treated similar to the cornea as
corneal described above. Vitamin A deficiency in the ocular surface leads to hyperkeratinization of
epithelium, squamous metaplasia and decreased conjunctival goblet cells [148]. Topical vitamin A is
found to be a promising approach in treating DED, as it improves the tear film stability by enhancing
mucin production, thus maintaining the functionality of ocular surface epithelial cells [149]. P2Y2
receptor purinergic receptors located in the conjunctival goblet cells, acinar, ductal epithelial cells of the
meibomian gland. P2Y2 receptors are activated by ATP and UTP and are studied to be involved in cell
proliferation, apoptosis and inflammation [150]. Diquafosol tetrasodium is a P2Y2 agonist which was
found to increase the tear film stability, hydrate the ocular surface by inducing tear fluid secretion from
the lacrimal glands and mucin secretion by the conjunctival goblet cells [151]. Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic
acid (15(S)-HETE), rebamipide and Gefarnate are secretagogue that can induce the secretion of mucin
layer by the conjunctival goblet cells [152]. Treatment on pterygium and conjunctivochalasis could
improve the dry eye symptom in these patients.
4.3. Therapy Targeting Lacrimal Gland
Primary Sjögren’s syndrome is often accompanied by deteriorated secretory glands mainly the
lacrimal gland, hence the therapy targets to improve the glandular secretion and to prevent dryness.
B-lymphocytes activated by the B cell activating factor (BAFF) secrete autoantibodies/cytokines and
involve in the pathogenesis of the disease. Thus, the various monoclonal antibodies are designed
to suppress the B-activation. Efficacy of various immunomodulators such as rituximab, abatacept,
belimumab, infliximab, etanercept and hydroxychloroquine have been studied, yet the outcome
varies in each study and these are under development [153–155]. The current treatment strategy
is symptom based recommending the use of artificial tear, topical cyclosporins, secretagogue [156].
Neurostimulation has been recently studied on animal models which directly target the lacrimal nerve
enhancing the aqueous tear secretion. The novel strategy was found to be effective in increasing
the aqueous tear volumes [157]. Next generation regenerative medicine has advanced in their focus
towards the transplantation of bioengineered lacrimal gland. Hirayama et al. using the organ germ
method has established and engrafted bioengineered lacrimal gland in a murine model, which showed
significant efficacy in restoring the secretory function and enhancing the tear production [158].
4.4. Therapy Targeting Meibomian Gland
Warm compresses, manual lid massage, and gland expression can be prescribed to patients
with meibomian gland dysfunction. Various mechanical devices have been developed to express
meibum, among them is FDA approved Lipiflow System™ which liquefies meibum by thermal
compression [159]. Intense-Pulsed-Light (IPL) consist of a light source emitting high-intensity
polychromatic light of wavelength ranging from (515–1200 nm). The high intensity light is focused
on to the target tissue resulting in the release of heat aiding in lesion removal. Using the similar
principal periocular IPL devices are currently available for treating MGD related DED [160]. Lipid
containing lubricants are also used in treating DED to compensate the lipid layer of the tear film.
The active ingredients in these lubricants include light mineral oil, mineral oil, castor oil, glycerin,
and polupropylene glycol at varying concentrations. Phospholipid liposomal sprays used on the lid
margin can consort with the meibum to maintain the polar lipid layer and improve the spreading
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 15 of 28
of the lipid layer. Oral dietary supplementation of ω-3 fatty acid is emphasized in MGD patients
as the dietary lipid intake can alter the meibum composition. Clinical studies have observed the
improvement of tear stability, and tear secretion in patients with MGD after the use of ω-3 fatty
acid [161]. Combinational therapy of topical lipid emulsion, eye lid cleansing wipes and oral ω-3 fatty
acid has also shown significant improvement in the functionality of the meibomian gland in MGD
patients [162].
4.5. Therapy Targeting Eyelids
Eyelid hygiene, antibiotics and warm compress are the traditional therapy recommended
according to the severity of blepharitis. Oral or topical azithromycin is also prescribed as an adjuvant
for the patients with blepharitis [163,164]. When the severity of the syndrome increases and the topical
treatment interventions fail, minor eyelid surgical options are suggested. For example, temporary
tarsorrhaphy, reduces the opening of the eye and prevents the tear evaporation [165].
4.6. Therapy Targeting the Tear Film
The initial step in the management of dry eye is focused to restore the volume of the tear and
compensating the tear components. The down regulated tear film components are rendered to the
ocular surface exogenously by various forms of eye drops or ointments in the management of DED.
4.6.1. Compensation of Tear
Artificial tears are the most common initial therapeutic strategy for DED, and are mainly composed
of ingredients that mimic the tear to maintain the osmolarity of the depleted tear film. Preservatives
such as benzalkonium chloride should be avoided if possible, because they induce toxic epithelial
damage and accentuate inflammation [166]. Electrolytes such as potassium and bicarbonate ions
are supplemented to maintain the ionic balance of the tear film. Bicarbonates and potassium ions
enable the rehabilitation of corneal epithelial barrier and the deficient mucin layer [167]. Hypotonic
artificial tears with glycerin, erythritol, and levocarnitine aid in the maintenance of tear osmolarity
in DED. Water soluble polymers such as hypromellose, hydroxyethylcellulose, methylcellulose,
carboxymethylcellulose, hyaluronic acid, polyethylene glycol, propylene glycol, glycerine, polysorbate
and polyacrylic acid act as lubricant in the reduction of friction and irritational discomfort. The polymer
also enhances the viscosity and increases the retention time and mucoadhesion of the artificial tears on
the ocular surface. The hydroxyl or carboxyl functional groups of the polymers interact by forming
hydrogen bonds with the water molecules on the ocular surface [168,169]. Lipid containing lubricants
are also used in treating DED to compensate the lipid layer of the tear film. The active ingredients
in these lubricants includes light mineral oil, mineral oil, castor oil, glycerin, polupropylene glycol
at varying concentrations [170]. Phospholipid liposomal sprays used on the lid margin can consort
with the meibum to maintain the polar lipid layer and improve the spreading of the lipid layer [171].
An alternative approach to synthetic artificial tears is autologous serum. For some severe DED patients
especially the treatment of artificial tears could not work, diluted autologous serum can mimic natural
tears more closely [172].
4.6.2. Stimulated Tear Production
Stimulation of the secretory gland and the secretory cells are upcoming treatment modalities in
DED. The therapy involves the stimulation of lacrimal gland by inducing the cholinergic signaling
pathway in the acinar cells. Pilocarpine (parasympathomimetic alkaloid) and cevimeline are the
muscarinic agent acting as an agonist on M1 and M3 receptors increasing the tear dynamics, but are
associated with sweating and diarrhea, and may additionally cause accommodative spasm and
brow ache in young patients [168,173]. Diquafosol tetrasodium, a P2Y2 agonist, that stimulate
transconjunctival water flow and mucin secretion from conjunctival goblet cells, exhibits therapeutic
efficacies and good tolerability in patients with DED [174], but also accompanied by side effects such
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 16 of 28
as sweating, headache, diarrhea, nausea, abdominal pain [151]. Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating
polypeptide (PACAP) is a neurotransmitter through the PAC1-R/cAMP/PKA/AQP5 signaling
pathway can stimulate the lacrimal gland and induce tear secretion. Studies on the effect of topical
PACAP on murine models have proved that it is capable of regulating the tear protein secretion as
well as tear fluid secretion [175]. Its clinical safety, ocular tolerability and therapeutic efficacies in dry
eye patients need to be further confirmed.
The principle of neurostimulation therapy involves the activation of peripheral nerve pathway of
the target organ to restore the organ functionality. Clinical studies have used the Oculeve intranasal
neurostimulation device to activate the nasal sensory neurons using electrical stimuli in enhancing
the tear secretion. The results showed that the neuro stimulator device was efficient to induce tear
secretion and increased the tear volumes [176].
4.6.3. Controlling Tear Evaporation
Lipid based artificial tears can protect the tear film evaporation, additionally modulating
the atmospheric humidity and decreasing the ocular surface exposure can enhance the protective
effect. The periocular humidity can be increased by using moisture-retaining eyeglasses, swimming
goggles [177]. Apart from goggles, gas-permeable scleral lenses also retain the humidified environment
and promote wound healing of the epithelial cells [178]. Prosthetic Replacement of the Ocular Surface
Ecosystems (PROSE) are custom-designed lens made of fluorosilicone/acrylate polymers which
are studied to be safe and effective towards various ocular surface disorders [179,180]. Though the
sclera contact lenses are promising mode of DED therapy, the risk of microbial keratitis, difficulty in
maintenance, handling becomes the retracting disadvantages. Additionally, castor oil eye drops are
effective and safe in the treatment of MGD resulting from prevention of tear evaporation [181].
4.6.4. Regulating Excessive Nasolacrimal Drainage
Punctal occlusions retain the exposure of lubricants and inhibit the drainage of natural tears.
Punctal plugs are effective in patients with severe aqueous-deficient dry eye disease [182]. Punctal
plugs are studied to reduce the hyperosmolarity, improve the goblet cell density and enhance the
tear film stability [183]. However, the punctual plugs are piggy backed with certain drawbacks:
plug extrusion may enlarge the puncta, punctal scarring, canalicular stenosis, displacement of
plugs into the canalicular pathway leads to canaliculitis and dacryocystitis, pyogenic granuloma
due to mucosal damage caused by plugs, epiphora, microbial contamination induce biofilm
formation with chronic infection and may cause localized discomfort characterized with allergic
reactions [152,184]. Blocking the puncta can also exposes the ocular surface to tear film loaded with
pro-inflammatory cytokines which may intensify inflammation resulting in persistent ocular surface
damage [185]. Thus, the contraindications should be taken into consideration while choosing punctual
plugs in treating DED.
4.7. Therapy Targeting Inflammation
Regardless of the initiating etiology of DED, a common pathogenic mechanism of DED is related to
a vicious circle of inflammation with consequent ocular surface damage. Anti-inflammatory drugs have
gained importance as they disrupt the vicious cycle and restore the normal ocular homeostasis in DED.
Different anti-inflammatory drugs have been applied in clinic to treat dry eye related inflammation.
Corticosteroids can suppress the expression of pro-inflammatory genes and enhances the
expression of anti-inflammatory genes annexin-1 (lipocortin-1), IL-10 and the inhibitors of NF-κB [186].
Topical corticosteroid use is highly effective on suppressing ocular surface inflammation in DED;
however, due to a wide range of potential side effects including glaucoma, cataracts, and ocular
infection, it is limited to short-term use (2–4 weeks) [187–190].
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been evaluated as prospective therapy for
dry eye. The anti-inflammatory properties of NSAIDs lie in blocking COX-1 and/or -2 which play an
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 17 of 28
important role in the synthesis of prostaglandins from arachidonic acid. The topical formulations of
NSAIDs including pranoprofen, bromfenac, and thymosin β4, have been confirmed to be effective on
suppressing ocular surface inflammation and eye pain in DED [191–193].
Doxycycline and azithromycin are antibiotics that are considered to have anti-inflammatory
property. Doxycycline can inhibit the activation of the MAPK and NFkB pathways and protects
the corneal epithelial barrier function and conjunctival goblet cells [144]. Azithromycin can inhibit
the inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and MMP-1, -3 and -9 produced in response to the
desiccating stress [194].
Cyclosporine A (CsA) inhibits the T-cell activation thereby acting as an immunosuppressant. It can
inhibit lymphocytic infiltration, decrease the immune, inflammatory response and inhibit apoptosis of
the lacrimal and conjunctival epithelial cells in DED [195,196]. The commercial dose of CsA eye drops
available is 0.05%, which is effective only in cases of mild to moderate dry eye. Tacrolimus (FK506) is
another immunosuppressant capable of inhibiting the activity of calcineurin to dephosphorylate the
nuclear factor of activated T cells [197]. Topical 0.03% tacrolimus eye drop can improve tear stability
and ocular surface status in cases of Sjögren’s syndrome related DED [198].
Lifitegrast is a novel small molecule integrin antagonist that blocks the binding of intercellular
adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) to lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1). Lifitegrast
ophthalmic solution 5% was approved in the USA in 2016 for the treatment of DED. Phase III clinical
trials demonstrated that lifitegrast was engineered to break the interaction between LFA-1 and ICAM-1,
restricts T-cells activity and improving both signs and symptoms without obvious side effects in
DED [199]. Based on the available evidence, inhibition of LFA-1/ICAM-1 interaction with lifitegrast
offers a novel and effective approach to reducing ocular surface inflammation in DED [199–201].
Tofacitinib (CP-690,550) is a target specific inhibitor of Janus kinase (JAK) signaling pathway
which is involved in the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases. A phase I/II study demonstrated that
topical application of tofacitinib improve both symptoms and signs in DED, and showed potential
immunomodulatory effect by reducing the HLA-DR on the conjunctival cell surface and dampening
the levels of inflammatory cytokines in tear [202,203].
Dietary supplements of essential fatty acids, such as fish oils, which contain ω-3 and -6 fatty
acids, have been recommended for DED treatment. Fatty acids are eicosanoid precursors, known to
reduce inflammation with decreased T-cell proliferation and inflammatory cytokine production [204].
It has been shown that fatty acids is beneficial in reducing symptoms and signs of ocular surface
inflammation in DED [205].
4.8. Therapy Targeting Nerve Supply of the Ocular Surface
An important mechanism of DED is an altered ocular surface sensitivity leading to a
neurosecretory block [3]. Nerve growth factor (NGF) and its receptor p75 and TrkA are highly expressed
in the ocular surface and may play an important role in ocular surface diseases [206]. NGF can increase
ocular surface sensitivity, inhibit inflammatory reactions, reduce the apoptosis of corneal epithelium
and regulate tear film production by lacrimal gland and goblet cells, thus NGF can be considered a
novel treatment for dry eye [207,208].
4.9. Therapy Targeting Systemic Hormones
Numerous studies state that the secretory function of the lacrimal and meibomian gland is
regulated by the sex hormones. Hormonal supplementation in DED is also being widely studied
and showed their role in improving the levels of secretion and suppression of inflammation [209].
Detection of androgen receptors expression on the ocular surface tissues has initiated the idea of
synthesizing androgen and estrogen receptor inhibitors [210]. Growth hormone supplementation may
be a novel therapy to treat corneal epithelial defect due to severe dry eye [42].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 18 of 28
4.10. Therapy Targeting Vascular and Lymphatic System
Inflammatory response stimulates the lymphangiogenic factors VEGF-C and VEGF-D through
pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β and IL-17) signals. Studies using murine models showed
that blocking of pro-lymphangiogenic VEGF-C by anti lymphangiogenic agents could potentially
suppress inflammation and epitheliopathies associated with DED [211]. Doxycycline has also being
demonstrated to be a potential therapeutic agent inhibiting VEGFC and suppress lymphangiogenesis
in murine models which can be extrapolated to DED therapy [212]. For the conjunctivochalasis caused
lymphangiectasia, subconjunctival bevacizumab injection and liquid nitrogen cryotherapy may be an
effect therapy [213,214].
5. Conclusions and Prospective of Future Research
Dry eye is a multifactorial disease with complex pathophysiological process. The mechanism by
which the OSM changes can result in the presentation of differential clinical symptom and signs is not
clearly known til date. The interactions between different microenvironment components during the
development of DED also need to be further illustrated. Our understanding on DED will undoubtedly
increase further studies on OSM.
The ultimate goal of DED management is to restore the ocular surface and tear film to their normal
homeostatic state, i.e., the healthy OSM. A wide range of therapeutics is available in treating DED,
but we need to pay attention to evaluate whether certain treatment interventions can interfere with the
functions of another OSM component, inducing unrelated complications or even exacerbating DED.
For instance, puncta occlusion can alter the dynamic of tear film, and long-term application of artificial
tear with preservatives can induce epithelial damage and alteration of the ocular surface microbiome.
Customized and personalized therapy targeting the OSM will aid in complete resolution of DED.
Acknowledgments: This study was supported in part by the grants from Chinese National Key Scientific Research
Project (No. 2013CB967003 (to Wei Li)), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, No. 81270977,
No. 81470602 (to Wei Li), and No. 81330022 (to Zuguo Liu)), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities of China (No. 2012121049, and No. 20720150171 (to Wei Li)).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Lemp, M.A.; Baudouin, C.; Baum, J.; Dogru, M.; Foulks, G.N.; Kinoshita, S.; Laibson, P.; McCulley, J.;
Murube, J.; Pflugfelder, S.C.; et al. The definition and classification of dry eye disease: Report of the
Definition and Classification Subcommittee of the International Dry Eye WorkShop (2007). Ocul. Surf. 2007,
5, 75–92.
2. Stern, M.E.; Beuerman, R.W.; Fox, R.I.; Gao, J.; Mircheff, A.K.; Pflugfelder, S.C. The pathology of dry eye:
The interaction between the ocular surface and lacrimal glands. Cornea 1998, 17, 584–589. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
3. Mantelli, F.; Massaro-Giordano, M.; Macchi, I.; Lambiase, A.; Bonini, S. The cellular mechanisms of dry eye:
From pathogenesis to treatment. J. Cell. Physiol. 2013, 228, 2253–2256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Kureshi, A.K.; Dziasko, M.; Funderburgh, J.L.; Daniels, J.T. Human corneal stromal stem cells support limbal
epithelial cells cultured on RAFT tissue equivalents. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Watsky, M.A.; Jablonski, M.M.; Edelhauser, H.F. Comparison of conjunctival and corneal surface areas in
rabbit and human. Curr. Eye Res. 1988, 7, 483–486. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Inatomi, T.; SpurrMichaud, S.; Tisdale, A.S.; Zhan, Q.; Feldman, S.T.; Gipson, I.K. Expression of secretory
mucin genes by human conjunctival epithelia. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 1996, 37, 1684–1692.
7. Paulsen, F.P.; Berry, M.S. Mucins and TFF peptides of the tear film and lacrimal apparatus.
Prog. Histochem. Cytochem. 2006, 41, 1–53. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Zhang, X.; Volpe, E.A.; Gandhi, N.B.; Schaumburg, C.S.; Siemasko, K.F.; Pangelinan, S.B.; Kelly, S.D.;
Hayday, A.C.; Li, D.Q.; Stern, M.E.; et al. NK cells promote Th-17 mediated corneal barrier disruption in dry
eye. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e36822. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 19 of 28
9. Hattori, T.; Saban, D.R.; Emami-Naeini, P.; Chauhan, S.K.; Funaki, T.; Ueno, H.; Dana, R. Donor-derived,
tolerogenic dendritic cells suppress immune rejection in the indirect allosensitization-dominant setting of
corneal transplantation. J. Leukoc. Biol. 2012, 91, 621–627. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Khandelwal, P.; Blanco-Mezquita, T.; Emami, P.; Lee, H.S.; Reyes, N.J.; Mathew, R.; Huang, R.; Saban, D.R.
Ocular mucosal CD11b+ and CD103+ mouse dendritic cells under normal conditions and in allergic immune
responses. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e64193. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Nadri, S.; Soleimani, M.; Kiani, J.; Atashi, A.; Izadpanah, R. Multipotent mesenchymal stem cells from adult
human eye conjunctiva stromal cells. Differentiation 2008, 76, 223–231. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Lee, M.J.; Ko, A.Y.; Ko, J.H.; Lee, H.J.; Kim, M.K.; Wee, W.R.; Khwarg, S.I.; Oh, J.Y. Mesenchymal
Stem/Stromal Cells Protect the Ocular Surface by Suppressing Inflammation in an Experimental Dry
Eye. Mol. Ther. 2015, 23, 139–146. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Conrady, C.D.; Joos, Z.P.; Patel, B.C. Review: The Lacrimal Gland and Its Role in Dry Eye. J. Ophthalmol.
2016, 2016, 7542929. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Obata, H. Anatomy and Histopathology of Human Meibomian Gland. Cornea 2002, 21, S70–S74. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
15. Call, M.; Fischesser, K.; Lunn, M.O.; Kao, W.W. A unique lineage gives rise to the meibomian gland. Mol. Vis.
2016, 22, 168–172. [PubMed]
16. Dutton, J.J.; Frueh, B.R. Eyelid Anatomy and Physiology with Reference to Blepharoptosis. In Evaluation
and Management of Blepharoptosis; Cohen, A.J., Weinberg, D.A., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2011;
pp. 13–26.
17. Mishima, S.; Maurice, D.M. The oily layer of the tear film and evaporation from the corneal surface.
Exp. Eye Res. 1961, 1, 39–45. [CrossRef]
18. Pucker, A.D.; Nichols, J.J. Analysis of Meibum and Tear Lipids. Ocul. Surf. 2012, 10, 230–250. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
19. Pucker, A.D.; Haworth, K.M. The Presence and Significance of Polar Meibum and Tear Lipids. Ocul. Surf.
2015, 13, 26–42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Johnson, M.E.; Murphy, P.J. Changes in the tear film and ocular surface from dry eye syndrome. Prog. Retin.
Eye Res. 2004, 23, 449–474. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Davidson, H.J.; Kuonen, V.J. The tear film and ocular mucins. Vet. Ophthalmol. 2004, 7, 71–77. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
22. Gipson, I.K.; Argueso, P. Role of mucins in the function of the corneal and conjunctival epithelia.
Int. Rev. Cytol. 2003, 231, 1–49. [PubMed]
23. Hodges, R.R.; Dartt, D.A. Tear film mucins: Front line defenders of the ocular surface; comparison with
airway and gastrointestinal tract mucins. Exp. Eye Res. 2013, 117, 62–78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Rolando, M.; Zierhut, M. The ocular surface and tear film and their dysfunction in dry eye disease.
Surv. Ophthalmol. 2001, 45, S203–S210. [CrossRef]
25. Klenkler, B.; Sheardown, H.; Jones, L. Growth Factors in the Tear Film: Role in Tissue Maintenance, Wound
Healing, and Ocular Pathology. Ocul. Surf. 2007, 5, 228–239. [CrossRef]
26. Knop, E.; Knop, N. Anatomy and Immunology of the Ocular Surface. Chem. Immunol. Allergy 2007, 92, 36–49.
[PubMed]
27. Vantrappen, L.; Geboes, K.; Missotten, L.; Maudgal, P.C.; Desmet, V. Lymphocytes and Langerhans cells in
the normal human cornea. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 1985, 26, 220–225.
28. Stern, M.E.; Schaumburg, C.S.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Dry eye as a mucosal autoimmune disease. Int. Rev. Immunol.
2013, 32, 19–41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Stern, M.E.; Schaumburg, C.S.; Dana, R.; Calonge, M.; Niederkorn, J.Y.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Autoimmunity at
the ocular surface: Pathogenesis and regulation. Mucosal Immunol. 2010, 3, 425–442. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Zhang, X.; Schaumburg, C.S.; Coursey, T.G.; Siemasko, K.F.; Volpe, E.A.; Gandhi, N.B.; Li, D.Q.;
Niederkorn, J.Y.; Stern, M.E.; Pflugfelder, S.C.; et al. CD8(+) Cells Regulate the T-helper-17 Response
in an Experimental Murine Model of Sjögren Syndrome. Mucosal Immunol. 2014, 7, 417–427. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
31. Dastjerdi, M.H.; Dana, R. Corneal Nerve Alterations in Dry Eye-associated Ocular Surface Disease.
Int. Ophthalmol. Clin. 2009, 49, 11–20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 20 of 28
32. Dartt, D.A. Neural Regulation of Lacrimal Gland Secretory Processes: Relevance in Dry Eye Diseases.
Prog. Retin. Eye Res. 2009, 28, 155–177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Knop, E.; Knop, N.; Millar, T.; Obata, H.; Sullivan, D.A. The international workshop on meibomian gland
dysfunction: Report of the subcommittee on anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology of the meibomian
gland. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2011, 52, 1938–1978. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Diebold, Y.; Ríos, J.D.; Hodges, R.R.; Rawe, I.; Dartt, D.A. Presence of nerves and their receptors in mouse
and human conjunctival goblet cells. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2001, 42, 2270–2282.
35. Sullivan, D.A.; Jensen, R.V.; Suzuki, T.; Richards, S.M. Do sex steroids exert sex-specific and/or opposite
effects on gene expression in lacrimal and meibomian glands? Mol. Vis. 2009, 15, 1553–1572. [PubMed]
36. Versura, P.; Giannaccare, G.; Campos, E.C. Sex-steroid imbalance in females and dry eye. Curr. Eye Res. 2015,
40, 162–175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Schirra, F.; Suzuki, T.; Richards, S.M.; Jensen, R.V.; Liu, M.; Lombardi, M.J.; Rowley, P.; Treister, N.S.;
Sullivan, D.A. Androgen control of gene expression in the mouse meibomian gland. Investig. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 2005, 46, 3666–3675. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Truong, S.; Cole, N.; Stapleton, F.; Golebiowski, B. Sex hormones and the dry eye. Clin. Exp. Optom. 2014, 97,
324–336. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Suzuki, T.; Kinoshita, Y.; Tachibana, M.; Matsushima, Y.; Kobayashi, Y.; Adachi, W.; Sotozono, C.; Kinoshita, S.
Expression of sex steroid hormone receptors in human cornea. Curr. Eye Res. 2001, 22, 28–33. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
40. Beauregard, C.; Brandt, P. Down regulation of interleukin-1β-induced nitric oxide production in lacrimal
gland acinar cells by sex steroids. Curr. Eye Res. 2004, 29, 59–66. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Liu, Y.; Knop, E.; Knop, N.; Sullivan, D.A.; List, E.O.; Kopchick, J.J.; Kam, W.R.; Ding, J. Growth Hormone
Influence on the Morphology and Size of the Mouse Meibomian Gland. J. Ophthalmol. 2016, 2016, 5728071.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Wirostko, B.; Rafii, M.; Sullivan, D.A.; Morelli, J.; Ding, J. Novel therapy to treat corneal epithelial defects:
A hypothesis with growth hormone. Ocul. Surf. 2015, 13, 204–212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Ding, J.; Wirostko, B.; Sullivan, D.A. Human growth hormone promotes corneal epithelial cell migration
in vitro. Cornea 2015, 34, 686. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Ebling, F.; Ebling, E.; Randall, V.; Skinner, J. The effects of hypophysectomy and of bovine growth hormone
on the responses to testosterone of prostate, preputial, Harderian and lachrymal glands and of brown
adipose tissue in the rat. J. Endocrinol. 1975, 66, 401–406. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Mantelli, F.; Moretti, C.; Macchi, I.; Massaro-Giordano, G.; Cozzupoli, G.M.; Lambiase, A.; Bonini, S.
Effects of Sex Hormones on Ocular Surface Epithelia: Lessons Learned From Polycystic Ovary Syndrome.
J. Cell. Physiol. 2016, 231, 971–975. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Pleyer, U.; Sherif, Z. Corticosteroids in ophthalmology. In Recent Advances in Glucocorticoid Receptor Action;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2002; pp. 65–81.
47. Chauhan, S.K.; Dohlman, T.H.; Dana, R. Corneal lymphatics: Role in ocular inflammation as inducer and
responder of adaptive immunity. J. Clin. Cell. Immunol. 2014, 5, 1000256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Ecoiffier, T.; Sadovnikova, A.; Yuen, D.; Chen, L. Conjunctival Lymphatic Response to Corneal Inflammation
in Mice. J. Ophthalmol. 2012, 2012, 953187. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Hos, D.; Bachmann, B.; Bock, F.; Onderka, J.; Cursiefen, C. Age-related changes in murine limbal lymphatic
vessels and corneal lymphangiogenesis. Exp. Eye Res. 2008, 87, 427–432. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Lohela, M.; Bry, M.; Tammela, T.; Alitalo, K. VEGFs and receptors involved in angiogenesis versus
lymphangiogenesis. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 2009, 21, 154–165. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Dong, Q.; Brulc, J.M.; Iovieno, A.; Bates, B.; Garoutte, A.; Miller, D.; Revanna, K.V.; Gao, X.;
Antonopoulos, D.A.; Slepak, V.Z.; et al. Diversity of Bacteria at Healthy Human Conjunctiva.
Immunol. Microbiol. 2011, 52, 5408–5413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Doan, T.; Akileswaran, L.; Andersen, D.; Johnson, B.; Ko, N.; Shrestha, A.; Shestopalov, V.; Lee, C.S.;
Lee, A.Y.; VanGelder, R.N. Paucibacterial Microbiome and Resident DNA Virome of the Healthy Conjunctiva.
Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2016, 57, 5116–5126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Kaufman, H.E.; Azcuy, A.M.; Varnell, E.D.; Sloop, G.D.; Thompson, H.W.; Hill, J.M. HSV-1 DNA in tears and
saliva of normal adults. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2005, 46, 241–247. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 21 of 28
54. Reading, N.C.; Sperandio, V. Quorum sensing: The many languages of bacteria. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2006,
254, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Mshangila, B.; Paddy, M.; Kajumbula, H.; Ateenyi-Agaba, C.; Kahwa, B.; Seni, J. External ocular surface
bacterial isolates and their antimicrobial susceptibility patterns among pre-operative cataract patients at
Mulago National Hospital in Kampala, Uganda. BMC Ophthalmol. 2013, 13, 71–75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Moore, J.E.; Graham, J.E.; Beirne, R.O.; Downes, S.C.; Moore, C.B.T. The effect of post-operative antibiotics
on the ocular surface bacterial flora in cataract patients. Acta Ophthalmol. Scand. 2007, 85. [CrossRef]
57. Miller, D.; Iovieno, A. The role of microbial flora on the ocular surface. Curr. Opin. Allergy Clin. Immunol.
2009, 9, 466–470. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Berry, M.; Harris, A.; Lumb, R.; Powell, K. Commensal ocular bacteria degrade mucin. Br. J. Ophthal. 2002,
86, 1412–1416. [CrossRef]
59. Stern, M.E.; Gao, J.; Siemasko, K.F.; Beuerman, R.W.; Pflugfelder, S.C. The role of the lacrimal functional unit
in the pathophysiology of dry eye. Exp. Eye Res. 2004, 78, 409–416. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Muller, L.J.; Marfurt, C.F.; Kruse, F.; Tervo, T.M. Corneal nerves: Structure, contents and function.
Exp. Eye Res. 2003, 76, 521–542. [CrossRef]
61. Zoukhri, D.; Hodges, R.R.; Byon, D.; Kublin, C.L. Role of proinflammatory cytokines in the impaired
lacrimation associated with autoimmune xerophthalmia. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2002, 43, 1429–1436.
62. Wang, Y.; Pei, G.; Cai, Y.C.; Zhao, Z.Q.; Wang, J.B.; Jiang, C.L.; Zheng, Z.C.; Liu, X.Y. Human interleukin-2
could bind to opioid receptor and induce corresponding signal transduction. Neuroreport 1996, 8, 11–14.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Mircheff, A.K. Sjogrens syndrome as failed local immunohomeostasis: Prospects for cell-based therapy.
Ocul. Surf. 2003, 1, 160–179. [CrossRef]
64. Sanchis-Gimeno, J.A.; Lleo-Perez, A.; Alonso, L.; Rahhal, M.S.; Martinez-Soriano, F. Reduced corneal
thickness values in postmenopausal women with dry eye. Cornea 2005, 24, 39–44. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Liu, Z.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Corneal thickness is reduced in dry eye. Cornea 1999, 18, 403–407. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
66. Ali, N.M.; Hamied, F.M.; Farhood, Q.K. Corneal thickness in dry eyes in an Iraqi population. Clin. Ophthalmol.
2017, 11, 435–440. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Lu, N.; Lin, F.; Huang, Z.; He, Q.; Han, W. Changes of Corneal Wavefront Aberrations in Dry Eye Patients
after Treatment with Artificial Lubricant Drops. J. Ophthalmol. 2016, 2016, 1342056. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Fabiani, C.; Barabino, S.; Rashid, S.; Dana, M.R. Corneal epithelial proliferation and thickness in a mouse
model of dry eye. Exp. Eye Res. 2009, 89, 166–171. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69. Meloni, M.; De Servi, B.; Marasco, D.; Del Prete, S. Molecular mechanism of ocular surface damage:
Application to an in vitro dry eye model on human corneal epithelium. Mol. Vis. 2011, 17, 113–126.
[PubMed]
70. Kheirkhah, A.; Saboo, U.S.; Abud, T.B.; Dohlman, T.H.; Arnoldner, M.A.; Hamrah, P.; Dana, R. Reduced
Corneal Endothelial Cell Density in Patients With Dry Eye Disease. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2015, 159, 1022–1036.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Pflugfelder, S.C.; Tseng, S.C.; Yoshino, K.; Monroy, D.; Felix, C.; Reis, B.L. Correlation of goblet cell density
and mucosal epithelial membrane mucin expression with rose bengal staining in patients with ocular
irritation. Ophthalmology 1997, 104, 223–235. [CrossRef]
72. Pflugfelder, S.C.; Corrales, R.M.; de Paiva, C.S. T helper cytokines in dry eye disease. Exp. Eye Res. 2013, 117,
118–125. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Chhadva, P.; Alexander, A.; McClellan, A.L.; McManus, K.T.; Seiden, B.; Galor, A. The Impact of
Conjunctivochalasis on Dry Eye Symptoms and Signs. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2015, 56, 2867–2871.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Kampitak, K.; Leelawongtawun, W. Precorneal tear film in pterygium eye. J. Med. Assoc. Thail. 2014, 97,
536–539.
75. Roka, N.; Shrestha, S.P.; Joshi, N.D. Assessment of tear secretion and tear film instability in cases with
pterygium and normal subjects. Nepal. J. Ophthalmol. 2013, 5, 16–23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Sullivan, D.A.; Krenzer, K.L.; Rocha, E.M.; Toda, I. Aqueous tear deficiency in Sjögren’s syndrome: Possible
causes and potential treatment. Oculodermal Dis. 1997, 95–152.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 22 of 28
77. Xuan, J.; Shen, L.; Malyavantham, K.; Pankewycz, O.; Ambrus, J.L.; Suresh, L. Temporal histological changes
in lacrimal and major salivary glands in mouse models of Sjogren’s syndrome. BMC Oral Health 2013, 13, 51.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. Bacman, S.; Berra, A.; Sterin-Borda, L.; Borda, E. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor antibodies as a new
marker of dry eye Sjogren syndrome. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2001, 42, 321–327.
79. Sullivan, D.A. Sex hormones and Sjogren’s syndrome. J. Rheumatol. Suppl. 1997, 50, 17–32. [PubMed]
80. Hassan, A.S.; Clouthier, S.G.; Ferrara, J.L.M.; Stepan, A.; Mian, S.I.; Ahmad, A.Z.; Elner, V.M. Lacrimal
Gland Involvement in Graft-Versus-Host Disease: A Murine Model. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2005, 46,
2692–2697. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
81. Borchman, D.; Foulks, G.N.; Yappert, M.C.; Milliner, S.E. Differences in human meibum lipid composition
with meibomian gland dysfunction using NMR and principal component analysis. Investig. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 2012, 53, 337–347. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Bron, A.; Benjamin, L.; Snibson, G. Meibomian gland disease. Classification and grading of lid changes. Eye
1991, 5 Pt 4, 395–411. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Driver, P.J.; Lemp, M.A. Meibomian gland dysfunction. Surv. Ophthalmol. 1996, 40, 343–367. [CrossRef]
84. Yap, M. Tear break-up time is related to blink frequency. Acta Ophthalmol. 1991, 69, 92–94. [CrossRef]
85. Chang, M.; Lee, H.; Park, M.S.; Baek, S. The clinical characteristics and new classification of sticky eyelid
syndrome in East Asian patients. Acta Ophthalmol. 2014, 92, e667–e670. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Geerling, G.; Tauber, J.; Baudouin, C.; Goto, E.; Matsumoto, Y.; O’Brien, T.; Rolando, M.; Tsubota, K.;
Nichols, K.K. The international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: Report of the subcommittee
on management and treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2011, 52,
2050–2064. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87. Rynerson, J.M.; Perry, H.D. DEBS—A unification theory for dry eye and blepharitis. Clin. Ophthalmol. 2016,
10, 2455–2467. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88. Lucca, J.A.; Nunez, J.N.; Farris, R.L. A comparison of diagnostic tests for keratoconjunctivitis sicca: Lactoplate,
Schirmer, and tear osmolarity. CLAO J. 1990, 16, 109–112. [PubMed]
89. Luo, L.; Li, D.Q.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Hyperosmolarity-Induced Apoptosis in Human Corneal Epithelial Cells Is
Mediated by Cytochrome c and MAPK Pathways. Cornea 2007, 26, 452–460. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90. Li, D.Q.; Luo, L.; Chen, Z.; Kim, H.S.; Song, X.J.; Pflugfelder, S.C. JNK and ERK MAP kinases mediate
induction of IL-1β, TNF-α and IL-8 following hyperosmolar stress in human limbal epithelial cells.
Exp. Eye Res. 2006, 82, 588–596. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91. Liu, H.; Begley, C.; Chen, M.; Bradley, A.; Bonanno, J.; McNamara, N.A.; Nelson, J.D.; Simpson, T. A Link
between Tear Instability and Hyperosmolarity in Dry Eye. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2009, 50, 3671–3679.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
92. Kamao, T.; Yamaguchi, M.; Kawasaki, S.; Mizoue, S.; Shiraishi, A.; Ohashi, Y. Screening for dry eye with
newly developed ocular surface thermographer. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2011, 151, 782–791. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Craig, J.P.; Tomlinson, A. Importance of the lipid layer in human tear film stability and evaporation.
Optom. Vis. Sci. 1997, 74, 8–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. Bron, A.J.; Tiffany, J.M. The contribution of meibomian disease to dry eye. Ocul. Surf. 2004, 2, 149–165.
[CrossRef]
95. Abusharha, A.A.; Pearce, E.I. The effect of low humidity on the human tear film. Cornea 2013, 32, 429–434.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Guillon, M.; Maissa, C. Contact lens wear affects tear film evaporation. Eye Contact Lens 2008, 34, 326–330.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Guillon, M.; Maissa, C. Tear film evaporation—Effect of age and gender. Contact Lens Anterior Eye 2010, 33,
171–175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98. Peng, C.C.; Cerretani, C.; Braun, R.J.; Radke, C.J. Evaporation-driven instability of the precorneal tear film.
Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2014, 206, 250–264. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99. Chang, S.W.; Chang, C.J. Delayed tear clearance in contact lens associated papillary conjunctivitis.
Curr. Eye Res. 2001, 22, 253–257. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Afonso, A.A.; Monroy, D.; Stern, M.E.; Feuer, W.J.; Tseng, S.C.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Correlation of tear fluorescein
clearance and Schirmer test scores with ocular irritation symptoms. Ophthalmology 1999, 106, 803–810.
[CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 23 of 28
101. Dursun, D.; Wang, M.; Monroy, D.; Li, D.-Q.; Lokeshwar, B.L.; Stern, M.E.; Pflugfelder, S.C.A. Mouse Model
of Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2002, 43, 632–638.
102. Shrestha, R.K.; Borchman, D.; Foulks, G.N.; Yappert, M.C.; Milliner, S.E. Analysis of the Composition of Lipid
in Human Meibum from Normal Infants, Children, Adolescents, Adults, and Adults with Meibomian Gland
Dysfunction Using (1)H-NMR Spectroscopy. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2011, 52, 7350–7358. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
103. Lam, S.M.; Tong, L.; Yong, S.S.; Li, B.; Chaurasia, S.S.; Shui, G.; Wenk, M.R. Meibum Lipid Composition in
Asians with Dry Eye Disease. PLoS ONE 2011, 6, e24339. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Srinivasan, S.; Thangavelu, M.; Zhang, L.; Green, K.B.; Nichols, K.K. iTRAQ Quantitative Proteomics in the
Analysis of Tears in dry eye patients. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci 2012, 53, 5052–5059. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Soria, J.; Durán, J.A.; Etxebarria, J.; Merayo, J.; González, N.; Reigada, R.; García, I.; Acera, A.; Suárez, T.
Tear proteome and protein network analyses reveal a novel pentamarker panel for tear film characterization
in dry eye and meibomian gland dysfunction. J. Proteom. 2012, 78, 94–112. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Perumal, N.; Funke, S.; Pfe, N.; Grus, F.H. Proteomics analysis of human tears from aqueous-deficient and
evaporative dry eye patients. Sci. Rep. 2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Argüeso, P.; Balaram, M.; Spurr-Michaud, S.; Keutmann, H.T.; Dana, M.R.; Gipson, I.K. Decreased Levels of
the Goblet Cell Mucin MUC5AC in Tears of Patients with Sjögren Syndrome. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
2002, 43, 1004–1011.
108. Corrales, R.M.; Narayanan, S.; Fernández, I.; Mayo, A.; Galarreta, D.J.; Fuentes-Páez, G.; Chaves, F.J.;
Herreras, J.M.; Calonge, M. Ocular Mucin Gene Expression Levels as Biomarkers for the Diagnosis of Dry
Eye Syndrome. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2011, 52, 8363–8369. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Caffery, B.; Heynen, M.L.; Joyce, E.; Jones, L.; Ritter, R.; Senchyna, M. MUC1 expression in Sjogren’s
syndrome, KCS, and control subjects. Mol. Vis. 2010, 16, 1720–1727. [PubMed]
110. Zhang, X.; Chen, W.; De Paiva, C.S.; Volpe, E.A.; Gandhi, N.B.; Farley, W.J.; Li, D.Q.; Niederkorn, J.Y.;
Stern, M.E.; Pflugfelder, S.C.; et al. Desiccating Stress Induces CD4 T-Cell—Mediated Sjögren’s
Syndrome—Like Corneal Epithelial Apoptosis via Activation of the Extrinsic Apoptotic Pathway by
Interferon-γ. Am. J. Pathol. 2011, 179, 1807–1814. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Niederkorn, J.Y.; Stern, M.E.; Pflugfelder, S.C.; De Paiva, C.S.; Corrales, R.M.; Gao, J.; Siemasko, K. Desiccating
stress induces T cell-mediated Sjogren’s Syndrome-like lacrimal keratoconjunctivitis. J. Immunol. 2006, 176,
3950–3957. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Zhang, X.; Chen, W.; De Paiva, C.S.; Corrales, R.M.; Volpe, E.A.; McClellan, A.J.; Farley, W.J.; Li, D.Q.;
Pflugfelder, S.C. Interferon-γ Exacerbates Dry Eye-Induced Apoptosis in Conjunctiva through Dual
Apoptotic Pathways. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2011, 52, 6279–6285. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. De Paiva, C.S.; Chotikavanich, S.; Pangelinan, S.B.; Pitcher, J.D., 3rd; Fang, B.; Zheng, X.; Farley, W.J.; Li, D.Q.;
Pflugfelder, S.C. IL-17 disrupts corneal barrier following desiccating stress. Mucosal Immunol. 2009, 2,
243–253. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. De Paiva, C.S.; Raince, J.K.; McClellan, A.J.; Shanmugam, K.P.; Pangelinan, S.B.; Volpe, E.A.; Corrales, R.M.;
Farley, W.J.; Corry, D.B.; Li, D.Q.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Homeostatic control of conjunctival mucosal goblet cells
by NKT-derived IL-13. Mucosal Immunol. 2011, 4, 397–408. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Nepp, J.; Wirth, M. Fluctuations of Corneal Sensitivity in Dry Eye Syndromes—A Longitudinal Pilot Study.
Cornea 2015, 34, 1221–1226. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Cruzat, A.; Witkin, D.; Baniasadi, N.; Zheng, L.; Ciolino, J.B.; Jurkunas, U.V.; Chodosh, J.; Pavan-Langston, D.;
Dana, R.; Hamrah, P. Inflammation and the nervous system: The connection in the cornea in patients with
infectious keratitis. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2011, 52, 5136–5143. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Waterman, S.A.; Gordon, T.P.; Rischmueller, M. Inhibitory effects of muscarinic receptor autoantibodies on
parasympathetic neurotransmission in Sjögren’s syndrome. Arthritis Rheum. 2000, 43, 1647–1654. [CrossRef]
118. Wickham, L.A.; Rocha, E.M.; Gao, J.; Krenzer, K.L.; da Silveira, L.A.; Toda, I.; Sullivan, D.A. Identification
and hormonal control of sex steroid receptors in the eye. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 1998, 438, 95–100. [PubMed]
119. Nakata, M.; Okada, Y.; Kobata, H.; Shigematsu, T.; Reinach, P.S.; Tomoyose, K.; Saika, S. Diabetes mellitus
suppresses hemodialysis-induced increases in tear fluid secretion. BMC Res. Notes 2014, 7, 78. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
120. Hyndiuk, R.A.; Kazarian, E.L.; Schultz, R.; Seideman, S. Neurotrophic corneal ulcers in diabetes mellitus.
Arch. Ophthalmol. 1977, 95, 2193–2196. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 24 of 28
121. Garcia-Zalisnak, D.; Nash, D.; Yeu, E. Ocular surface diseases and corneal refractive surgery.
Curr. Opin. Ophthalmol. 2014, 25, 264–269. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Sutu, C.; Fukuoka, H.; Afshari, N.A. Mechanisms and management of dry eye in cataract surgery patients.
Curr. Opin. Ophthalmol. 2016, 27, 24–30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Ang, R.T.; Dartt, D.A.; Tsubota, K. Dry eye after refractive surgery. Curr. Opin. Ophthalmol. 2001, 12, 318–322.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Krenzer, K.L.; Reza Dana, M.; Ullman, M.D.; Cermak, J.M.; Tolls, D.B.; Evans, J.E.; Sullivan, D.A. Effect of
Androgen Deficiency on the Human Meibomian Gland and Ocular Surface 1. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2000,
85, 4874–4882. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
125. Sullivan, D.A.; Sullivan, B.D.; Evans, J.E.; Schirra, F.; Yamagami, H.; Liu, M.; Richards, S.M.; Suzuki, T.;
Schaumberg, D.A.; Sullivan, R.M.; et al. Androgen deficiency, meibomian gland dysfunction, and evaporative
dry eye. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2002, 966, 211–222. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
126. Arakaki, R.; Ishimaru, N.; Hayashi, Y. Immunotherapeutic targets in estrogen deficiency-dependent Sjögren’s
syndrome-related manifestations. Immunotherapy 2010, 2, 339–346. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Gupta, A.; Sadeghi, P.B.; Akpek, E.K. Occult thyroid eye disease in patients presenting with dry eye
symptoms. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2009, 147, 919–923. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
128. Goyal, S.; Chauhan, S.K.; El Annan, J.; Nallasamy, N.; Zhang, Q.; Dana, R. Evidence of Corneal
Lymphangiogenesis in Dry Eye Disease: A Potential Link to Adaptive Immunity? Arch. Ophthalmol.
2010, 128, 819–824. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
129. Min, J.H.; Lee, C.H.; Ji, Y.W.; Yeo, A.; Noh, H.; Song, I.; Kim, E.K.; Lee, H.K. Activation of Dll4/Notch
Signaling and Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-1 α Facilitates Lymphangiogenesis in Lacrimal Glands in Dry Eye.
PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0147846. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
130. Watters, G.A.; Turnbull, P.R.; Swift, S.; Petty, A.; Craig, J.P. Ocular surface microbiome in meibomian gland
dysfunction. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 2017, 45, 105–111. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Venugopal, R.; Satpathy, G.; Sangwan, S.; Kapil, A.; Aron, N.; Agarwal, T.; Pushker, N.; Sharma, N.
Conjunctival Microbial Flora in Ocular Stevens–Johnson Syndrome Sequelae Patients at a Tertiary Eye
Care Center. Cornea 2016, 35, 1117–1121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
132. Kugadas, A.; Gadjeva, M. Impact of Microbiome on Ocular Health. Ocul. Surf. 2016, 14, 342–349. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
133. Pflugfelder, S.C.; Geerling, G.; Kinoshita, S.; Lemp, M.A.; McCulley, J.; Nelson, D.; Novack, G.N.;
Shimazaki, J.; Wilson, C. Management and therapy of dry eye disease: Report of the Management and
Therapy Subcommittee of the International Dry Eye WorkShop (2007). Ocul. Surf. 2007, 5, 163–178.
134. Sullivan, B.D.; Crews, L.A.; Messmer, E.M.; Foulks, G.N.; Nichols, K.K.; Baenninger, P.; Geerling, G.;
Figueiredo, F.; Lemp, M.A. Correlations between commonly used objective signs and symptoms for the
diagnosis of dry eye disease: Clinical implications. Acta Ophthalmol. 2014, 92, 161–166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Viso, E.; Rodríguez-Ares, M.T.; Abelenda, D.; Oubiña, B.; Gude, F. Prevalence of asymptomatic and
symptomatic meibomian gland dysfunction in the general population of Spain. Investig. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 2012, 53, 2601–2606. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Kojima, T.; Ishida, R.; Dogru, M.; Goto, E.; Matsumoto, Y.; Kaido, M.; Tsubota, K. The effect of autologous
serum eyedrops in the treatment of severe dry eye disease: A prospective randomized case-control study.
Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2005, 139, 242–246. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Semeraro, F.; Forbice, E.; Nascimbeni, G.; Taglietti, M.; Romano, V.; Guerra, G.; Costagliola, C. Effect of
Autologous Serum Eye Drops in Patients with Sjögren Syndrome-related Dry Eye: Clinical and In Vivo
Confocal Microscopy Evaluation of the Ocular Surface. In Vivo 2016, 30, 931–938. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
138. Xiao, X.; He, H.; Lin, Z.; Luo, P.; He, H.; Zhou, T.; Zhou, T. Therapeutic effects of epidermal growth factor on
benzalkonium chloride-induced dry eye in a mouse model. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2012, 53, 191–197.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
139. Xiao, X.; Luo, P.; Zhao, H.; Chen, J.; He, H.; Xu, Y.; Lin, Z.; Zhou, Y.; Xu, J.; Liu, Z. Amniotic membrane
extract ameliorates benzalkonium chloride-induced dry eye in a murine model. Exp. Eye Res. 2013, 115,
31–40. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
140. Gris, O.; del Campo, Z.; Wolley-Dod, C.; Guell, J.L.; Bruix, A.; Calatayud, M.; Adán, A. Amniotic membrane
implantation as a therapeutic contact lens for the treatment of epithelial disorders. Cornea 2002, 21, 22–27.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 25 of 28
141. Bacon, A.S.; Astin, C.; Dart, J.K. Silicone rubber contact lenses for the compromised cornea. Cornea 1994, 13,
422–428. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Pullum, K.W.; Whiting, M.A.; Buckley, R.J. Scleral contact lenses: The expanding role. Cornea 2005, 24,
269–277. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Maulvi, F.A.; Shaikh, A.A.; Lakdawala, D.H.; Desai, A.R.; Pandya, M.M.; Singhania, S.S.; Vaidya, R.J.;
Ranch, K.M.; Vyas, B.A.; Shah, D.O. Design and optimization of a novel implantation technology in contact
lenses for the treatment of dry eye syndrome: In vitro and in vivo evaluation. Acta Biomater. 2017, 53,
211–221. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
144. Kim, H.-S.; Luo, L.; Pflugfelder, S.C.; Li, D.-Q. Doxycycline Inhibits TGF-β1–Induced MMP-9 via Smad
and MAPK Pathways in Human Corneal Epithelial Cells. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2005, 46, 840–848.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
145. Kymionis, G.D.; Bouzoukis, D.I.; Diakonis, V.F.; Siganos, C. Treatment of chronic dry eye: Focus on
cyclosporine. Clin. Ophthalmol. 2008, 2, 829–836. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
146. De Paiva, C.; Pflugfelder, S. Rationale for anti-inflammatory therapy in dry eye syndrome. Arquivos Brasileiros
de Oftalmologia 2008, 71, 89–95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
147. Deng, R.; Su, Z.; Hua, X.; Zhang, Z.; Li, D.Q.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Osmoprotectants suppress the production and
activity of matrix metalloproteinases induced by hyperosmolarity in primary human corneal epithelial cells.
Mol. Vis. 2014, 20, 1243–1252. [PubMed]
148. Sommer, A. Effects of Vitamin A Deficiency on the Ocular Surface. Ophthalmology 1983, 90, 592–600.
[CrossRef]
149. Kim, E.C.; Choi, J.-S.; Joo, C.K. A Comparison of Vitamin A and Cyclosporine A 0.05% Eye Drops for
Treatment of Dry Eye Syndrome. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2009, 147, 206–213.e3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
150. Guzman-Aranguez, A.; Gasull, X.; Diebold, Y.; Pintor, J. Purinergic Receptors in Ocular Inflammation.
Mediat. Inflamm. 2014, 2014, 320906. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Keating, G.M. Diquafosol Ophthalmic Solution 3%: A Review of Its Use in Dry Eye. Drugs 2015, 75, 911–922.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Jehangir, N.; Bever, G.; Mahmood, S.M.J.; Moshirfar, M. Comprehensive Review of the Literature on Existing
Punctal Plugs for the Management of Dry Eye Disease. J. Ophthalmol. 2016, 2016, 9312340. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
153. Gottenberg, J.; Ravaud, P.; Puéchal, X.; Larroche, C.; Dubost, J.J.; Rist, S.; Saraux, A. Effects of
hydroxychloroquine on symptomatic improvement in primary sjögren syndrome: The joquer randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 2014, 312, 249–258. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
154. Faustman, D.L.; Vivino, F.B.; Carsons, S.E. TReatment of primary sjögren syndrome with rituximab.
Ann. Intern. Med. 2014, 161, 376–377. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
155. Mariette, X.; Seror, R.; Quartuccio, L.; Baron, G.; Salvin, S.; Fabris, M.; Desmoulins, F.; Nocturne, G.;
Ravaud, P.; de Vita, S. Efficacy and safety of belimumab in primary Sjögren’s syndrome: Results of the
BELISS open-label phase II study. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 2015, 74, 526. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
156. Holdgate, N.; St Clair, E.W. Recent advances in primary Sjogren’s syndrome. F1000Research 2016, 5, F1000.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
157. Kossler, A.L.; Wang, J.; Feuer, W.; Tse, D.T. Neurostimulation of the lacrimal nerve for enhanced tear
production. Ophthalmic Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 2015, 31, 145–151. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
158. Hirayama, M.; Ogawa, M.; Oshima, M.; Sekine, Y.; Ishida, K.; Yamashita, K.; Desmoulins, F.; Nocturne, G.;
Ravaud, P.; de Vita, S. Functional lacrimal gland regeneration by transplantation of a bioengineered organ
germ. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2497. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
159. Greiner, J.V. A Single LipiFlow®Thermal Pulsation System Treatment Improves Meibomian Gland Function
and Reduces Dry Eye Symptoms for 9 Months. Curr. Eye Res. 2012, 37, 272–278. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
160. Craig, J.P.; Chen, Y.-H.; Turnbull, P.R.K. Prospective Trial of Intense Pulsed Light for the Treatment of
Meibomian Gland DysfunctionProspective Trial of IPL for Treatment of MGD. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
2015, 56, 1965–1970. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
161. Oleñik, A.; Mahillo-Fernández, I.; Alejandre-Alba, N.; Fernández-Sanz, G.; Pérez, M.A.; Luxan, S.;
Quintana, S.; Martínez de Carneros Llorente, A.; García-Sandoval, B.; Jiménez-Alfaro, I. Benefits of ω-3 fatty
acid dietary supplementation on health-related quality of life in patients with meibomian gland dysfunction.
Clin. Ophthalmol. 2014, 8, 831–836. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 26 of 28
162. Korb, D.R.; Blackie, C.A.; Finnemore, V.M.; Douglass, T. Effect of using a combination of lid wipes, eye drops,
and ω-3 supplements on meibomian gland functionality in patients with lipid deficient/evaporative dry
eye. Cornea 2015, 34, 407–412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Fadlallah, A.; Rami, H.E.; Fahd, D.; Dunia, I.; Bejjani, R.; Chlela, E.; Waked, N.; Jabbour, E.; Fahed, S.
Azithromycin 1.5% ophthalmic solution: Efficacy and treatment modalities in chronic blepharitis.
Arquivos Brasileiros de Oftalmologia 2012, 75, 178–182. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
164. Kashkouli, M.B.; Fazel, A.J.; Kiavash, V.; Nojomi, M.; Ghiasian, L. Oral azithromycin versus doxycycline
in meibomian gland dysfunction: A randomised double-masked open-label clinical trial. Br. J. Ophthalmol.
2015, 99, 199–204. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
165. Lee, V.; Currie, Z.; Collin, J.R.O. Ophthalmic management of facial nerve palsy. Eye 2004, 18, 1225–1234.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
166. Ichijima, H.; Petroll, W.M.; Jester, J.V.; Cavanagh, H.D. Confocal microscopic studies of living rabbit cornea
treated with benzalkonium chloride. Cornea 1992, 11, 221–225. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
167. Gilbard, J.P.; Rossi, S.R. An electrolyte-based solution that increasescorneal glycogen and conjunctival
goblet-cell density in a rabbit model for keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Ophthalmology 1992, 99, 600. [CrossRef]
168. Velpandian, T.; Moksha, L. Mucoadhesive Polymers and Ocular Lubricants. In Pharmacology of Ocular
Therapeutics; Velpandian, T., Ed.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 269–283.
169. Zheng, X.; Goto, T.; Ohashi, Y. Comparison of In Vivo Efficacy of Different Ocular Lubricants in Dry Eye
Animal ModelsEfficacy of Ocular Lubricants in Animal Model. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2014, 55,
3454–3460. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
170. Simmons, P.A.; Carlisle-Wilcox, C.; Vehige, J.G. Comparison of novel lipid-based eye drops with aqueous eye
drops for dry eye: A multicenter, randomized controlled trial. Clin. Ophthalmol. 2015, 9, 657–664. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
171. Craig, J.P.; Purslow, C.; Murphy, P.J.; Wolffsohn, J.S. Effect of a liposomal spray on the pre-ocular tear film.
Contact Lens Anterior Eye 2010, 33, 83–87. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
172. Wang, W.Y.; Lee, Y.K.; Tsai, S.H.; Lin, Y.C.; Chen, Y.M. Autologous Serum Eye Drops Combined with Silicone
Hydrogen Lenses for the Treatment of Postinfectious Corneal Persistent Epithelial Defects. Eye Contact Lens
2017, 43, 225–229. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
173. Petrone, D.; Condemi, J.J.; Fife, R.; Gluck, O.; Cohen, S.; Dalgin, P. A double-blind, randomized,
placebocontrolled study of cevimeline in Sjogren’s syndrome patients with xerostomia and
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Arthritis Rheum. 2002, 46, 748–754. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
174. Koh, S. Clinical utility of 3% diquafosol ophthalmic solution in the treatment of dry eyes. Clin. Ophthalmol.
2015, 9, 865–872. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
175. Nakamachi, T.; Ohtaki, H.; Seki, T.; Yofu, S.; Kagami, N.; Hashimoto, H.; Shintani, N.; Baba, A.; Mark, L.;
Lanekoff, I. PACAP suppresses dry eye signs by stimulating tear secretion. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 12034.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
176. Friedman, N.J.; Butron, K.; Robledo, N.; Loudin, J.; Baba, S.N.; Chayet, A. A nonrandomized, open-label study
to evaluate the effect of nasal stimulation on tear production in subjects with dry eye disease. Clin. Ophthalmol.
2016, 10, 795–804. [PubMed]
177. Hart, D.E.; Simko, M.; Harris, E. How to produce moisture chamber eyeglasses for the dry eye patient. J. Am.
Optom. Assoc. 1994, 65, 517–522. [PubMed]
178. Romero-Rangel, T.; Stavrou, P.; Cotter, J.; Rosenthal, P.; Baltatzis, S.; Foster, C.S. Gas-permeable scleral contact
lens therapy in ocular surface disease. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2000, 130, 25–32. [CrossRef]
179. Dimit, R.; Gire, A.; Pflugfelder, S.C.; Bergmanson, J.P. Patient ocular conditions and clinical outcomes using
a PROSE scleral device. Contact Lens Anterior Eye 2013, 36, 159–163. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
180. Theophanous, C.; Irvine, J.A.; Parker, P.; Chiu, G.B. Use of Prosthetic Replacement of the Ocular
Surface Ecosystem Scleral Lenses in Patients with Ocular Chronic Graft-versus-Host Disease. Biol. Blood
Marrow Transplant. 2015, 21, 2180–2184. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
181. Goto, E.; Shimazaki, J.; Monden, Y.; Takano, Y.; Yagi, Y.; Shimmura, S.; Tsubota, K. Low-concentration
homogenized castor oil eye drops for noninflamed obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction. Ophthalmology
2002, 109, 2030–2035. [CrossRef]
182. Tai, M.C.; Cosar, C.B.; Cohen, E.J.; Rapuano, C.J.; Laibson, P.R. The clinical efficacy of silicone punctal plug
therapy. Cornea 2002, 21, 135–139. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 27 of 28
183. Gilbard, J.P.; Rossi, S.R.; Azar, D.T.; Heyda, K.G. Effect of punctal occlusion by Freeman silicone plug
insertion on tear osmolarity in dry eye disorders. CLAO J. 1989, 15, 216–218. [PubMed]
184. Shi, S.; Chen, W.; Zhang, X.; Ma, H.X.; Sun, L. Effects of silicone punctal plugs for tear deficiency dry eye
patients. Chin. J. Ophthalmol. 2013, 49, 151–154.
185. Tong, L.; Beuerman, R.; Simonyi, S.; Hollander, D.A.; Stern, M.E. Effects of Punctal Occlusion on Clinical
Signs and Symptoms and on Tear Cytokine Levels in Patients with Dry Eye. Ocul. Surf. 2016, 14, 233–241.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
186. Barnes, P.J. How corticosteroids control inflammation: Quintiles Prize Lecture 2005. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2006,
148, 245–254. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
187. Colligris, B.; Crooke, A.; Huete-Toral, F.; Pintor, J. An update on dry eye disease molecular treatment:
Advances in drug pipelines. Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 2014, 15, 1371–1390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
188. Nye, M.; Rudner, S.; Bielory, L. Emerging therapies in allergic conjunctivitis and dry eye syndrome.
Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 2013, 14, 1449–1465. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
189. Pinto-Fraga, J.; Lopez-Miguel, A.; Gonzalez-Garcia, M.J.; Fernandez, I.; Lopez-de-la-Rosa, A.;
Enriquez-de-Salamanca, A.; Stern, M.E.; Calonge, M. Topical Fluorometholone Protects the Ocular Surface of
Dry Eye Patients from Desiccating Stress: A Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial. Ophthalmology 2016, 123,
141–153. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
190. Patane, M.A.; Cohen, A.; From, S.; Torkildsen, G.; Welch, D.; Ousler, G.W., 3rd. Ocular iontophoresis
of EGP-437 (dexamethasone phosphate) in dry eye patients: Results of a randomized clinical trial.
Clin. Ophthalmol. 2011, 5, 633–643. [PubMed]
191. Chen, J.; Dong, F.; Chen, W.; Sun, X.; Deng, Y.; Hong, J.; Zhang, M.; Yang, W.; Liu, Z.; Xie, L. Clinical efficacy
of 0.1% pranoprofen in treatment of dry eye patients: A multicenter, randomized, controlled clinical trial.
Chin. Med. J. 2014, 127, 2407–2412. [PubMed]
192. Fujishima, H.; Fuseya, M.; Ogata, M.; Murat, D. Efficacy of bromfenac sodium ophthalmic solution for
treatment of dry eye disease. Asia-Pac. J. Ophthalmol. 2015, 4, 9–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
193. Sosne, G.; Ousler, G.W. Thymosin β 4 ophthalmic solution for dry eye: A randomized, placebo-controlled,
Phase II clinical trial conducted using the controlled adverse environment (CAE) model. Clin. Ophthalmol.
2015, 9, 877–884. [PubMed]
194. Zhang, L.; Su, Z.; Zhang, Z.; Lin, J.; Li, D.; Pflugfelder, S.C. Effects of azithromycin on gene expression profiles
of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory mediators in the eyelid margin and conjunctiva of patients with
meibomian gland disease. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015, 133, 1117–1123. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
195. Brignole, F.; Pisella, P.J.; Goldschild, M.; De Saint Jean, M.; Goguel, A.; Baudouin, C. Flow Cytometric Analysis
of Inflammatory Markers in Conjunctival Epithelial Cells of Patients with Dry Eyes. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis.
Sci. 2000, 41, 1356–1363.
196. Gürdal, C.; Genç, I.; Saraç, Ö.; Gönül, ˙ I.; Takmaz, T.; Can, ˙ I. Topical Cyclosporine in Thyroid ˙
Orbitopathy-Related Dry Eye: Clinical Findings, Conjunctival Epithelial Apoptosis, and MMP-9 Expression.
Curr. Eye Res. 2010, 35, 771–777. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
197. Siekierka, J.J.; Hung, S.H.Y.; Poe, M.; Lin, C.S.; Sigal, N.H. A cytosolic binding protein for the
immunosuppressant FK506 has peptidyl-prolyl isomerase activity but is distinct from cyclophilin. Nature
1989, 341, 755–757. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
198. Moscovici, B.K.; Holzchuh, R.; Sakassegawa-Naves, F.E.; Hoshino-Ruiz, D.R.; Albers, M.B.; Santo, R.M.;
Hida, R.Y. Treatment of Sjogren’s syndrome dry eye using 0.03% tacrolimus eye drop: Prospective
double-blind randomized study. Contact Lens Anterior Eye 2015, 38, 373–378. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
199. Tauber, J.; Karpecki, P.; Latkany, R.; Luchs, J.; Martel, J.; Sall, K.; Raychaudhuri, A.; Smith, V.; Semba, C.P.
Lifitegrast Ophthalmic Solution 5.0% versus Placebo for Treatment of Dry Eye Disease: Results of the
Randomized Phase III OPUS-2 Study. Ophthalmology 2015, 122, 2423–2431. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
200. Donnenfeld, E.D.; Karpecki, P.M.; Majmudar, P.A.; Nichols, K.K.; Raychaudhuri, A.; Roy, M.; Semba, C.P.
Safety of Lifitegrast Ophthalmic Solution 5.0% in Patients With Dry Eye Disease: A 1-Year, Multicenter,
Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Study. Cornea 2016, 35, 741–748. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
201. Sheppard, J.D.; Torkildsen, G.L.; Lonsdale, J.D.; D’Ambrosio, F.A.; McLaurin, E.B.; Eiferman, R.A.;
Kennedy, K.S.; Semba, C.P. Lifitegrast ophthalmic solution 5.0% for treatment of dry eye disease: Results of
the OPUS-1 phase 3 study. Ophthalmology 2014, 121, 475–483. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017, 18, 1398 28 of 28
202. Huang, J.F.; Yafawi, R.; Zhang, M.; McDowell, M.; Rittenhouse, K.D.; Sace, F.; Liew, S.H.; Cooper, S.R.;
Pickering, E.H. Immunomodulatory Effect of the Topical Ophthalmic Janus Kinase Inhibitor Tofacitinib
(CP-690,550) in Patients with Dry Eye Disease. Ophthalmology 2012, 119, e43–e50. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
203. Liew, S.H.; Nichols, K.K.; Klamerus, K.J.; Li, J.Z.; Zhang, M.; Foulks, G.N. Tofacitinib (CP-690,550), a Janus
Kinase Inhibitor for Dry Eye Disease: Results from a Phase 1/2 Trial. Ophthalmology 2012, 119, 1328–1335.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
204. Nishiyama, K.; Fujimoto, Y.; Takeuchi, T.; Azuma, Y.T. Aggressive Crosstalk Between Fatty Acids and
Inflammation in Macrophages and Their Influence on Metabolic Homeostasis. Neurochem. Res. 2017.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
205. Barabino, S.; Rolando, M.; Camicione, P.; Ravera, G.; Zanardi, S.; Giuffrida, S.; Calabria, G. Systemic linoleic
and gamma-linolenic acid therapy in dry eye syndrome with an inflammatory component. Cornea 2003, 22,
97–101. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
206. Lambiase, A.; Aloe, L.; Mantelli, F.; Sacchetti, M.; Perrella, E.; Bianchi, P.; Rocco, M.L.; Bonini, S.
Capsaicin-Induced Corneal Sensory Denervation and Healing Impairment Are Reversed by NGF
TreatmentNGF in Experimental Corneal Denervation. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2012, 53, 8280–8287.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
207. Lee, H.K.; Lee, K.S.; Kim, H.C.; Lee, S.H.; Kim, E.K. Nerve growth factor concentration and implications in
photorefractive keratectomy vs laser in situ keratomileusis. Am. J. Ophthalmol. 2005, 139, 965–971. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
208. Chang, E.J.; Im, Y.S.; Kay, E.P.; Kim, J.Y.; Lee, J.E.; Lee, H.K. The role of nerve growth factor in hyperosmolar
stress induced apoptosis. J. Cell. Physiol. 2008, 216, 69–77. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
209. Worda, C.; Nepp, J.; Huber, J.C.; Sator, M.O. Treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca with topical androgen.
Maturitas 2001, 37, 209–212. [CrossRef]
210. Rocha, E.; Wickham, L.; da Silveira, L.A.; Krenzer, K.; Yu, F.; Toda, I.; Sullivan, B.D.; Sullivan, D.A.
Identification of androgen receptor protein and 5α-reductase mRNA in human ocular tissues.
Br. J. Ophthalmol. 2000, 84, 76–84. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
211. Goyal, S.; Chauhan, S.K.; Dana, R. Blockade of Prolymphangiogenic VEGF-C suppresses Dry Eye Disease.
Arch. Ophthalmol. 2012, 130, 84–89. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
212. Han, L.; Su, W.; Huang, J.; Zhou, J.; Qiu, S.; Liang, D. Doxycycline Inhibits Inflammation-Induced
Lymphangiogenesis in Mouse Cornea by Multiple Mechanisms. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e108931. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
213. Fraunfelder, F.W. Liquid nitrogen cryotherapy for conjunctival lymphangiectasia: A case series. Trans. Am.
Ophthalmol. Soc. 2009, 107, 229–232. [PubMed]
214. Tan, J.C.; Mann, S.; Coroneo, M.T. Successful Treatment of Conjunctival Lymphangiectasia with
Subconjunctival Injection of Bevacizumab. Cornea 2016, 35, 1375–1377. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
