© 2022 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow
Review Article
Evaluation of ocular surface and tear function ‑ A review of current 
approaches for dry eye
Shizuka Koh, Srinivas K Rao1
, Sanjeev P Srinivas1
, Louis Tong2
, Alvin L Young3
Access this article online
Website:
www.ijo.in
DOI:
10.4103/ijo.IJO_1804_21
PMID:
*****
Quick Response Code:
An increasing prevalence of dry eye disease in the past decade has resulted in a greater focus on diagnostic
methods for this condition. There has been a proliferation of technologies that attempt to quantify
various aspects of tear function and ocular surface health. However, a cost‑effective, simple, and efficient
method remains elusive. In the Indian context, the majority of these patients present to the general
ophthalmologist, and a clinical approach that is quick and easy to perform would allow widespread usage
for accurate diagnosis. This article reviews currently available methods and their relevance to the general
ophthalmologist.
Key words: Dry eye disease, ocular surface, tear film
Departments of Innovative Visual Science and Ophthalmology, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan, 1
Department 
of Ophthalmology, Darshan Eye Care and Surgical Centre, Chennai,
India, 2
Department of Ophthalmology, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, NUS, Singapore, 3
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual 
Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, PRC
Correspondence to: Dr. Srinivas K Rao, Darshan Eye Care and Surgical
Centre, T 80, Fifth Main Road, Anna Nagar, Chennai ‑ 600 040,
Tamil Nadu, India. E‑mail: srinikrao@gmail.com
Received: 05-Jul-2021 Revision: 22-Aug-2021
Accepted: 10-Jan-2022	 Published: 31-May-2022
The precorneal tear film was first described by Wolff in
1946 as a three‑layered structure composed of a superficial
lipid layer, a middle aqueous layer, and an deeper mucin
layer.[1] A more recently proposed model suggests a
two‑layered structure forthe tear film with the superficial lipid
layer protecting a hydrated mucogel. Membrane‑associated
mucins (MUC1, 4, 16) on the epithelial cell microvilli constitute
the glycocalyx, while gel‑forming soluble mucins (MUC5AC)
are dispersed throughout the aqueous layer.[2] The volume of 
the tear film is 6–10 µL with a turnover of approximately 16%
per minute, and a thickness of 3–5 µm.[3] This small volume of 
tears is constantly regulated by a complex system involving
neural, humoral, endocrine, immune, and tactile feedback
mechanisms to ensure the stability of the tear film between
blinks. A stable precorneal tear film is essential for comfort
and clear vision.A variety of insults can affect the homeostasis
of the tear film, resulting in changes in volume, composition,
and turnover, causing discomfort and dysfunction of the
ocular surface.
All epithelia on the ocular surface are continuous, although
the type of epithelium can vary in the lid margins,the palpebral,
forniceal and bulbar conjunctiva, the limbus, and the cornea.
This epithelial lining is also in continuity with the glandular
epithelia of the lacrimal gland, accessory lacrimal glands, and
the meibomian glands. While this structure represents the
anatomical ocular surface, it is functionally integrated with
the tear film, the lids and lashes, and the nasolacrimal duct,
and together with the neural and immune system represent 
the ocular surface system, also termed the lacrimal functional
unit.[4] These components work togetherin synergy to provide,
protect, and maintain a smooth corneal refractive surface, and
disturbance in any one of these components can result in the
deranged function of the otherlinked elements as well. Thus, to
evaluate the ocular surface and tear film in health and disease,
it may be necessary to consider the ocular surface system as
a whole. However, each component is distinct in anatomy
and function, and a thorough understanding of their roles is
necessary to help plan the evaluation.
The tear film lipid layer is derived from meibomian
gland secretions, which are expressed from the lid margins
and spread across the tear film during each blink. It is
approximately 100‑nm thick and is composed of phospholipids,
free fatty acids, and cholesterol.[5] The surfactant action helps
lower the surface tension at the air–surface interface of the
precorneal tear film, thereby retarding tear evaporation and
maintaining stability between blinks. Excess lipid contaminates
the glycocalyx, rendering it hydrophobic, while too little lipid
promotes rapid evaporation and both conditions result in tear
film instability.
Cite this article as: Koh S, Rao SK, Srinivas SP, Tong L, Young AL. Evaluation 
of ocular surface and tear function - A review of current approaches for dry 
eye. Indian J Ophthalmol 2022;70:1883-91.
This is an open access journal, and articles are distributed under the terms of 
the Creative Commons Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 4.0 License, 
which allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially, 
as long as appropriate credit is given and the new creations are licensed under 
the identical terms.
For reprints contact: WKHLRPMedknow_reprints@wolterskluwer.com
1884 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology	 Volume 70 Issue 6
The aqueous layer is a mucogel that constitutes more than
90% of the tear film and is primarily composed of water(98%),
with salts, proteins, and growth factors. It is secreted by the
lacrimal and accessory lacrimal glands and subserves the
functions of hydration, lubrication, refraction, and protection
from infection. Tear turnover and drainage during blinks
serve to flush the ocular surface and remove debris and other
noxious substances. Thus, while a lack of tears can cause
hyperosmolarity and interfere with its various functions,
an excess of tears due to impaired drainage can promote
inflammation of the surface due to the retention of noxious
substances on the surface.[6]
The membrane‑associated mucins are responsible for
maintaining the wettability of the ocular surface by constituting
the glycocalyx. Their attachment to the microplicae of the
corneal epithelial cells increases the adhesion tension for water,
facilitating the spread of tears across the ocular surface. They
also offer a physical barrierfor epithelial cells against injury and
infection. The thickness of the mucin layer varies between 0.02
and 0.05 µm.[3] Soluble mucins are secreted by the conjunctival
goblet cells and are dispersed throughout the tear film, and
help in hydration and lubrication.[7]
It is widely accepted that the bulk of the tear fluid
comprising the aqueous portion of tears is supplied by the
lacrimal gland. It is secreted into the superior fornix, and
under normal circumstances, reaches the exposed surface
of the eye by entering the tear meniscus. The tear meniscus
is the distance the tear film extends along the ocular surface
perpendicular to the lid margin. The normal tear meniscus
height ranges between 250 and 600 µm.[8] Eyelid movement 
during blinking spreads the tear film uniformly across the
ocular surface. Negative pressure flow then causes the tear fluid
to move toward the nasal puncta, where it is drained into the
nasolacrimal system, aided by the contraction of the orbicularis
muscle. This maintains a balance between tear secretion and
removal and is important for an uninflamed ocular surface.
The tears also protect against infection and help maintain the
ocular microbiome.
Many intrinsic and extrinsic factors can affect the stability of
the tear film. As mentioned earlier, the ocular surface system
comprises other components as well; thus, apartfrom measures
of tearfunction such as volume, quality, and turnover, changes
in the anatomy and function (blink reflex) of the other adnexal
structures must also be looked for. These changes result in
inflammation, which is responsible for much ofthe damage that
is seen clinically, and the evaluation process must detect the
presence and extent of ocular surface inflammation. Thus, an
understanding of the healthy tear film and its relationship with
the ocular surface system is important to facilitate a thorough
evaluation, which allows better treatment.
The Dry Eye Patient
Symptoms of dry eye disease (DED) include constant ocular
irritation, foreign body sensation, and blurred vision, which
lead to a negative impact on the patients’ daily life and
social functioning, making DED an important public health
problem.[9,10] However, there is a discrepancy between the
ocular signs and symptoms of DED,[11] and the symptoms are 
often more aligned to non‑ocular conditions than to the tear
film parameters.[12] DED has recently been associated with other
chronic pain conditions and may share genetic susceptibility
with depression.[13‑16] Depression and anxiety are more 
prevalent in DED patients than in controls. Among patients
with DED, those suffering from primary Sjögren’s syndrome
have a higher prevalence and severity of depression.[17]
Patients who complain of symptoms yet have minimal
clinical signs encompass two subcategories: those in a
preclinical dry eye state and those with neuropathic pain.
Preclinicaldry eye patients have intermittent symptoms andcan
be managed by education, monitoring, and prevention. Patients
with neuropathic pain may have a lesion in the somatosensory
system, where the ocular pain symptoms disproportionately
outweigh the clinical signs. Such patients require management
by a pain specialist. Conversely, there are patients with signs
of DED on testing but who are asymptomatic. These can either
be patients with a predisposition to DED who are found to
have ocular surface changes without symptoms, for example,
during a preoperative examination, or those with reduced
corneal sensitivity. In the latter, they may have a concomitant
corneal disease with reduced corneal sensation or corneal
damage secondary to long‑standing DED which can mask
any discomfort.
Patients with aqueous deficiency dry eye (ADDE) may
complain of grittiness, discomfort, stinging, burning, tired eyes,
photophobia, visual fluctuations, and paradoxical tearing in
the early stages. ADDE patients may have worse symptoms
in the morning, postulated to be because of tear hyposecretion
during sleep, which improves when the patient is awakened,
and the blink reflex stimulates tear secretion and amelioration
of symptoms. A high index of suspicion for an underlying
autoimmune disease should be present when a young patient
presents with severeADDE. Patients with evaporative dry eye
typically complain of a burning sensation that is poorly relieved
by tear substitutes. This may be related to evaporation causing
a concentration of salts and proteins as well as inflammation
from meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD). Patients with
severe disease have worse symptoms in the morning, whereas
those with mild disease have increased symptoms in the
evening due to meibum contamination of the tear film. Patients
who have mucus deficiency may present with an increased
blink rate to maintain visual clarity as the impaired tear film
breakup (TBUT) time can lead to fluctuations in vision.
To aid in the diagnosis of the symptoms and measure the 
impact of DED on quality of life, multiple questionnaires
have been created and tested. Two of the commonly used
indices are the Ocular Surface Disease Index and the Dry Eye
Questionnaire‑5. These are used to quantify the extent of patient
discomfort and complaints.
Various factors can impactthe production, flow, and removal
of tears resulting in DED, and MGD is known to impact tear
function. However, many other related conditions can also
adversely influence the homeostasis of the tear film and ocular
surface. These include contactlens wear, allergies and infections
ofthe ocular surface,theuse oftopical andsystemicmedications,
hormonal imbalances, ocular surgery, neurotrophy, underlying
primary and secondary immune disorders, conjunctivochalasis,
superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis, conditions that impair a
normal lid blink reflex such as Parkinson’s disease, thyroid eye
disease and facial nerve palsy, incomplete blink secondary to
structural changes in the lid, increased friction‑related damage
June 2022	 1885 Koh, et al.: Ocular Surface Evaluation
due to changes in the lid wiper, conditions promoting tear stasis,
and extreme environmental conditions affecting temperature,
humidity, and airflow. These must also be considered in the
evaluation of such patients.
Assessing the tear film and ocular surface
A proper assessment of the ocular surface, tear film, and
patient symptom questionnaire is essential and should be
conducted based on the protocols suggested by both the
Dry Eye Workshop (DEWS) II report and the Asia Dry Eye
Society (ADES) consensus report.[18,19] According to DEWS II,
dry eye is characterized by multiple potential pathogeneses,
whereas ADES relies on tear film instability based on defects
in one or more components of the tear film or epithelial surface
abnormalities. The postulated mechanism of the vicious cycle
DED is different in DEWS II and ADES. While the DEWS II
report implicates inflammation and hyperosmolarity as key
triggers, inADES, more attention is paid to tear film instability
ortear film breakup. Therefore, current methods used to assess
tear film anatomy and function should focus on these key
factors. Ideally, these methods should be simple and easy to
use in every ophthalmic clinic.
The recommended criteria for dry eye diagnosis by DEWS
II are the presence of symptoms and at least one positive result
for homeostasis markers (decreased non‑invasive tear breakup
time (NIBUT), increased osmolarity, or a certain amount of
ocular surface damage).[18] In ADES, however, dry eye can be
diagnosed by a combination of symptoms and an unstable tear
film (decreased TBUT), with greater dependence on tear film
stability[19] [Fig. 1].
For reliable TBUT measurement, observation of the entire
cornea to detect the breakup area should be performed. The
time to appearance of the first random black spot, indicating
an absence of the fluorescein‑stained tear film, is noted. The
spot must not involve an area of altered corneal surface, and
three readings are averaged. It is ideal to use a metronome
to measure time. The suggested cut‑off value is 5 s, and eyes
with deficient tear function have a value less than the cut‑off.
Detecting the time to distortion of a grid reflected from the
tear film requires an instrument is considered non‑invasive
and more physiological and is termed NIBUT.
The tear volume ismeasuredby estimating the tearmeniscus
heights or by performing a Schirmer test by measuring
wetting at 5 min. In the clinic, tear meniscus assessment at
the slit‑lamp is subjectively assessed as normal, reduced, or
excessive. Automated instruments measure height by using
a photograph or the volume by using meniscometry.[20]
The Schirmer test in its various iterations provides useful
information if performed in a consistent manner. The original
Schirmertest (SchirmerI) is performed without anesthetic, and
the Jones test is performed with anesthetic to minimize reflex
tearing. The Schirmer II test is performed with conjunctival
anesthesia and nasal stimulation when fatigue of the ocular
surface receptors is suspected. Normal values forthe first two
are >15 mm and >10 mm, and ADDE is confirmed if the last
test value is <5 mm.
Measuring the lipid layer requires an instrument and uses
tear film interferometry. The meibomian glands are assessed
clinically by lid eversion orthe use of infrared meibographers.
The secretions can be expressed using a spring‑loaded
device (Korb evaluator) or by using the thumb to exert firm
pressure on the middle third of the lower lid. The number of
glands expressing secretions and the quantum and the quality
of the secretions are assessed subjectively.[21]
Hyperosmolarity of the tear film is considered an important
trigger for inflammation and can be measured using a
point‑of‑care device such as TearLab®, with a normal value of
302 + 6  mOsmol/kg.[22] Some of the other aspects of tearfunction
include tear evaporation, turnover, viscosity, surface tension,
pH, ferning as a measure of tear quality, and estimation of
the type and amount of proteins and electrolytes in the tears.
These are generally reserved for research settings. Although
it is clinically useful to assess delays in tear clearance from the
surface, by estimating the retention time of fluorescein in the
tear meniscus, this is more subjective than the tear clearance
tests. Prolonged retention of fluorescein in the meniscus
indicates a pro‑inflammatory state.
Although detailed quantitative assessments of these
metrics require advanced devices, a practical diagnosis of dry
eye is also possible with the use of only fluorescein, which is
routinely used in combination with slit‑lamp biomicroscopy
in every ophthalmology clinic. Fluorescein staining is a basic
technique in clinical practice, which assesses the integrity of
the corneal and conjunctival epithelium, aids in visualizing
the volume of the tear film in the meniscus, and estimates
stability by measuring the TBUT. The use of fluorescein
involves three steps, which are best performed using a
standardized, repeatable technique. Step 1: Apply a minimal
amount of fluorescein with saline. The use of dry eye drops
should be avoided because it may affect the results owing to
the demulcent in these drops. Ideally, normal saline should
be used to wet the strip. Step 2: Shake the strip vigorously to
remove excess diluent from the strip. Step 3: The fluorescein
strip is gently applied to the inferior palpebral conjunctiva,
with the patient looking up [Fig. 2].
Epithelial damage in the cornea and conjunctiva can be
observed with fluorescein. Generally, epithelial damage is
greater in the conjunctiva than in the cornea. In dry eyes,
corneal staining is usually observed in the inferior or central
part of the cornea as the upper 2 mm is usually covered by the
upper lid and is protected from desiccation, except in extreme
dry eye states and accompanying associated conditions such as
superiorlimbic keratoconjunctivitis,trichiasis, and eyelid wiper
variants. Using a cobalt blue filter (transmission spectrum:
410–500 nm) allows better excitation of the fluorescein in the
tear film over the cornea but interferes with the visualization
of conjunctival staining due to the intense reflection of the blue
light from the underlying sclera. The use of a blue‑free, yellow
barrier filter(transmission > 510 nm) can enhance the visibility
of fluorescein staining in the conjunctiva by blocking the blue
light[23] [Fig. 3]. Thus, using a yellow barrier filter facilitates
the assessment of both corneal and conjunctival staining with
fluorescein, obviating the need for rose bengal or lissamine
green, which are not commonly available in general clinics.
TheADES classification scheme, which uses only fluorescein
staining, is valuable as it also suggests the optimal management
of the dry eye state, and this is termed tear film‑oriented
therapy (TFOT).[24] Depending on the component of the tear
film that is defective, selective topical therapy is suggested to
stabilize the tear film. For optimal TFOT, a diagnostic method
1886 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology	 Volume 70 Issue 6
Figure 1: The criteria used by the Dry Eye Workshop II (DEWS II) and Asia Dry Eye Society (ADES) to diagnose dry eye disease. 
(Reprinted with permission from references 18 and 19)
is needed to suggest the insufficient component(s) of the
tear film. This is called tear film‑oriented diagnosis (TFOD).
A practical diagnosis based on the fluorescein breakup pattern
is recommended.[25]ADES categorizes dry eye into three types:
aqueous deficient dry eye (ADDE), increased evaporation
dry eye, and decreased wettability dry eye, based on tear
film abnormalities or epithelial surface abnormalities. The
classification of dry eye based on the tear film break‑up pattern
is shown in Fig. 4.
[26]
ADDE is the classical type of dry eye, including Sjögren’s
syndrome, which is associated with an unstable tear film
due to aqueous tear deficiency, and is diagnosed by noting
an area or line pattern. Area break is diagnosed when the
upward movement of fluorescein is not observed or is limited
to the lower part of the cornea. Line break is diagnosed as
a vertical line–like shape during the upward movement of
fluorescein in the lower part of the cornea, within which
fluorescein intensity decreases with time until the cessation
of the upward movement of fluorescein. The deficiency of
membrane‑associated mucin decreases the wettability of the
cornea and conjunctiva, contributes to instability of the tear
film, shortens the tear film breakup time, and is diagnosed by
noting a spot or dimple pattern. Spot break is diagnosed as a
spot‑like shape immediately after eye opening, and at least one
spot break is required for diagnosis. Dimple break is diagnosed
as an irregular but vertical line–like shape during the upward
movement of fluorescein within the zone closer to the central
part of the cornea. Abnormal lipid components are thought to
accelerate tear evaporation, resulting in an unstable tear film,
and is diagnosed by noting a random pattern. Random break
is diagnosed as an irregular and indefinite shape whose typical
location differs between cases and with each blink.
Figure 2: Fluorescein staining of the ocular surface – the three steps (Images from “Fluorescein Gallery Book” with permission)
June 2022	 1887 Koh, et al.: Ocular Surface Evaluation
Although TFOD is attractive as it uses a simple clinical
method, it requires practice to recognize the various patterns
described, which can be challenging, at least in the beginning.
The DEWS II guidelines include the use of non‑invasive tear
breakup time, tear osmolarity measurement, and ocular
surface staining to confirm the presence of a tear deficiency
state. Of these, only the last can be performed in a general eye
clinic in the absence of specific instrumentation. To determine
the contribution of aqueous deficiency and evaporative
pathologies, the DEWS II guidelines recommend the use of tear
Figure 3: The use of a yellow filter allows assessment of conjunctival staining with fluorescein
Figure 4: Tear Film Oriented Diagnosis (TFOD) – the fluorescein breakup patterns and their significance in diagnosing different types of dry 
eye. (FL ‑ fluorescein). (Reprinted with permission from reference 26 with modification)
1888 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology	 Volume 70 Issue 6
meniscus height measurement, lipid layer measurement, and
visualization of the meibomian gland anatomy,[27] all of which
require instrumentation usually not available in a general eye
clinic. Conventional methods such as Schirmertest, fluorescein
tear breakup time, and assessment of the quantum and quality
of the meibum secretions by pressure on the lower lid can also
be used to determine the extent and type of tear deficit.
Assessing ocular surface inflammation
Apart from the changes described in the previous section, the
DEWS IIreport also implicates inflammation and neurosensory
abnormalities as key etiological components of DED.[27]
Inflammation is intended to protect an injured ocular surface by
activation ofthe innate immune system. However, in conditions
such as DED, the persisting stimuli of hyperosmolarity and
friction‑induced surface damage during blinking result in
activation of the adaptive immune system, resulting in chronic
inflammation.[28]The inflammationfurtherpotentates thedryeye
state by damaging the tear secreting elements in the conjunctiva,
and the stressed epithelial cells produce corneal envelope
precursors, which induce keratinization in the secretory ducts
of the meibomian glands. This results in less lipid secretion
onto the ocular surface, further worsening DED, and the
backpressure in the glands due to the blocked ducts produces
gland atrophy and dropout. Thus, overtime, the vicious cycles
of DED, MGD, and inflammation coexist on the ocular surface
and are interrelated and self‑propagating. Knowledge of these
changes is helpful as immune pathways and moleculartriggers
can be targeted with specific therapy[29] [Fig. 5].
The most clinically evaluated inflammatory biomarker
at present is matrix metalloproteinase‑9 (MMP‑9), although
this marker is not specific for DED. It is also possible that
inflammation on the ocular surface can be mediated by other
molecules and enzymes. Thus, while the ability to detect
the presence of MMP‑9 on the ocular surface by using the
point‑of‑care InflammaDry® test is useful, it has its limitations.
It is a semi‑quantitative test that is positive when more than
40 ng/mL of MMP‑9 is detected. However, it is associated with
a high cost per test and is unavailable in a general eye clinic
at present. Because inflammation is considered an important
part of the ocular surface system dysfunction, detecting it by
other clinical tests becomes necessary.
Clinically, conjunctival hyperemia is a simple but effective
sign of ocular surface inflammation. The location and extent
of the redness, associated with the presence of edema, provide
clues regarding the cause and severity of the inflammation.
In ocular surface inflammation related to DED, the redness is
diffuse, and the extent can either be graded semi‑quantitatively
or by using photographic standards such as the Efron scale. The
quantification can also be done with the help of an automated
measurement and digital image analysis. If the inflammation
is intraocular as in uveitis, the redness is often more in the
circumcorneal region, while in scleritis and episcleritis, it is
more often localized to the inflamed area. In conjunctivitis,
the redness in the palpebral conjunctiva often exceeds that
in the bulbar conjunctiva, and there is associated watering or
discharge depending on the cause of the infection. Redness
limited to the superiorlimbal and bulbar conjunctiva suggests
limbic keratoconjunctivitis, while that limited to the inferior
bulbar conjunctiva associated with conjunctival staining
suggests medication toxicity.
A study by Yang et al.[30] noted that the extent of 
conjunctival staining with lissamine green correlated with
the levels of markers of inflammation such as interferon‑γ,
IL‑6, IL‑17, and MMP‑9 in two groups of patients with
non‑Sjögren’s syndrome DE and Sjögren’s syndrome DED.
Although corneal staining scores with fluorescein showed
positive correlations with interferon‑γ, IL‑17, and MMP‑9,
the correlation coefficients were lower than those seen with
conjunctival staining.
Another sign that has been described is the presence of lid
parallel conjunctival folds (LIPCOF), and their number and
height can vary depending on the severity and duration of the
chronic inflammatory DED. They are most often seen in the
temporal corner of the lowerlid and may explain the irritation
that often occurs in this area. They are postulated to occur
due to the effect of the increased amounts of MMP‑9 present
in this condition, which dissolve the extracellular matrix of
the conjunctiva to facilitate migration and recruitment of
leukocytes to the inflamed ocular surface. The increased friction
during blinking in eyes with less tears causes the loosened
conjunctiva to form folds along the lid margin.[31]
Apart from these easily performed clinical tests, confocal
microscopy can beusedto look forthepresence ofinflammatory
cells, epithelial changes, and the nerve plexus in such eyes. Use
of conjunctival HLA‑DR expression obtained from conjunctival
impression cytology has been reported, though the normal
range varies widely between studies.[32] Another advantage 
of impression cytology is the ability to analyze immune cells
with flow cytometry.[33] Flow cytometry on tear fluid washings
detects neutrophils and natural killer cells, and a study reported
a higher proportion of the former and a lower proportion of the 
latterinADDE with corneal staining compared to those without
staining and to controls.[34] Similarly, the quantification of tear
inflammatory cytokines may have interesting applications in
DED, but one of the practical issues to overcome is the wide
range of tear cytokine levels in the general population and
the effect of increasing age on the normal range.[35] These are 
presently used in studies.
Diagnosing disorders of the tear film and ocular surface
Tear dysfunction, an increasingly prevalent condition, causes
epithelial stress, inflammation, MGD, and ocular surface
damage.[28] The ocular surface and tearfunction are evaluated to
detect the presence of such alterations in a symptomatic patient,
use the changes to diagnose specific disease entities, document
the extent and grade severity of the condition, prognosticate
outcomes, and monitor progress and treatment efficacy. The
testing process is also performed in an asymptomatic patient
if there is an underlying condition such as mixed connective
disease. This is necessary as the presence of significant
ocular surface changes and even paracentral corneal melting
has been described in such eyes in the absence of patient
symptoms.[36] Subjective patient‑reported symptoms are also
assessed although they sometimes do not correlate closely with
the results of the objective tests.[37]
The test result values are used to understand the changes
in the ocular surface and tear film. Stability of the tear film is
indicated by the ocular protection index, defined as the ratio of
the BUT to the duration of the inter‑blink interval. Fluorescein
staining is used to detect damage, and the location and extent
June 2022	 1889 Koh, et al.: Ocular Surface Evaluation
Figure 6: An example of an automated device (a) that provides measurements of non‑invasive breakup time ‑ NIBUT (b), tear meniscus height (c), 
lipid layer assessment (d), scales to grade ocular redness score (e), and meibography (f). These results are presented in a composite report that 
also includes an assessment of the extent of meibomian gland dropout (g). Clinical assessment of the same parameters is performed by using the 
Schirmer test, fluorescein tear breakup time (FBUT), and slit‑lamp assessment of meibomian gland architecture, secretions, and inflammation (h)
d
h
c
g
b
f
a
e
Figure 5: The inter‑relationships between the vicious cycles of dry eye disease, meibomian gland dysfunction, and inflammation. All three coexist 
in eyes with chronic dry eye disease and tend to be self‑propagating, resulting in loss of ocular surface homeostasis and damage
of the stain can provide clues to different disease processes.
Staining of the lower third of the cornea is indicative of lid
margin disease, while that in the upperthird suggests upperlid
changes, often allergic. Interpalpebral corneal staining sparing
the uppermost 2 mm suggests a moderate amount of dry eye,
while staining of the entire corneal surface indicates very severe
dryeye (withequivalent conjunctival staining) ormedicamentosa
(withrelatively less conjunctiva staining). Staining ofthe superior
1890 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology	 Volume 70 Issue 6
bulbar conjunctiva in superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis,
the inferior in conjunctivochalasis, medial in mucus fishing
syndrome, and the temporal area in angular conjunctivitis can
be noted. The upper palpebral conjunctiva can show staining
in lid wiper epitheliopathy. The Marx line on the lower lid
margin indicated by spotty rose bengal or fluorescein stain is
located at the orifices of the meibomian glands and indicates the
mucocutaneous junction. With aging and in conditions causing
scarring and MGD, this line migrates anteriorly, moving closer
to the outer border of the lid margin, especially along the lower
temporal eyelid.[38] Staining preferentially in the lower bulbar
conjunctiva is suggestive of medication toxicity, while significant
redness of the conjunctiva without concurrent staining suggests
inflammation of the ocular surface.
A preferred order of manual testing would be fluorescein
use for BUT, corneal staining, lissamine green for lid wiper
epitheliopathy and conjunctival staining, Schirmer test, and
expression tests for meibomian gland secretions. If there is an
obvious lack of tears noted during slit‑lamp evaluation, then
topical anesthetic use is deferred, while it may be helpful to
use it at the start of the evaluation process if the deficit is less
obvious. Once measures of dysfunction have been obtained,
then these have to be interpreted and a suggested table for the
same is provided [Table 1]. Using the metrics for aqueous tear
volume, mucin‑related tear film stability, and lipid function, an
assessment of the type of DED can be obtained. To this is added
the presence and extent of inflammation and the occurrence
of other disorders of the ocular surface and adnexa to allow
a holistic determination of the condition of the ocular surface
and tear film, which then allows the formulation of a rational
strategy for management. Serial monitoring of these changes
also allows determination of the success of treatment overtime.
The clinical methods take more time, need a reproducible
standardized technique, often involve contact tests, and are
possibly less quantitative. However, they are simplerto do, cost
less, and do not require the need for specialized equipment.
The automated methods, although costly, are generally
more time‑efficient as one instrument can perform multiple
evaluations, are non‑contact, and provide a summary printout
of the results, which helps in documentation and discussions
with the patient. The endpoints of many of the parameters
that reflect a loss of ocular surface homeostasis often show a
significant overlap between normal and affected eyes, and there
is usually a range of values that detect dysfunction. Thus, a
precise endpoint is often not the goal, forinstance, in measuring
the axial length of the eye, and clinical methods generally
serve the purpose if access to an automated device is not
available. Given the disconnect between signs and symptoms
in this condition and the lack of precise endpoints, it has been
suggested that a panel of tests is betterfor an accurate diagnosis
rather than relying on one “gold standard” test [Fig. 6].
Conclusion
A thorough assessment of the ocular surface system anatomy
and function can be performed using history of illness, patient
symptoms, traditional clinical tests, the newly described TFOD,
or by using instruments to obtain quantitative measurements.
While there is currently very little data about the comparative
efficiency of each of these approaches, they do provide the
ophthalmologist with a choice of options. With time and
experience, using these approaches concurrently can help the
clinician decide about their relative importance in a clinical
setting and patient population and aid in the evolution of
the testing process to achieve greater efficiency and efficacy.
In conclusion, this paper provides an overview of currently
available techniques and their interpretation and suggests an
approach that would allow general ophthalmologists to detect
and grade dysfunction of the ocular surface and tear film in
their clinics by using easily available tools.
Financial support and sponsorship
Nil.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.
References
1.	 Wolff E. The muco‑cutaneous junction of the lid margin and
the distribution of the tear fluid. Trans Ophthalmol Soc UK
1946;66:291–308.
2.	 Yokoi N, BronAJ, Georgiev GA. The precorneal tear film as a fluid
shell: The effect of blinking and saccades on tear film distribution
and dynamics. Ocul Surf 2014;12:252–6.
3.	 Tiffany JM. The normal tear film. Dev Ophthalmol 2008;41:1‑20.
4.	 Research in dry eye: Report of the research Subcommittee of the
International Dry Eye Workshop in: Report of the International
Dry Eye Workshop (DEWS). Ocul Surf 2007;5:179‑93.
5.	 Report of the International Dry Eye Workshop (DEWS). Ocul Surf
2007;5:67‑202.
6.	 Braun RJ. Dynamics of the tear film. Annu Rev Fluid Mech
2012;44:267‑7.
7.	 Mantelli F, Mauris J,Argüeso P. The ocular surface epithelial barrier
and other mechanisms of mucosal protection. Curr Opin Allergy
Clin Immunol 2013;13:563‑8.
8.	 Wang J, Aquavella J, Palakru J, Chung S, Feng C. Relationships
between central tear film thickness and tear menisci of the upper
and lower eyelids. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:4349–55.
9.	 Mertzanis P, Abetz L, Rajagopalan K, Espindle D, Chalmers R,
Snyder C, et al. The relative burden of dry eye in patients’ lives:
Comparisons to a U.S. normative sample. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2005;46:46‑50.
Table 1: Assessment of the tear breakup time, Schirmer 
test, and lipid layer allows detection of the type of tear 
film deficit. Evaluating the presence of ocular surface 
inflammation, extent and location of staining, and other 
adnexal conditions allows holistic assessment of the loss 
of ocular surface homeostasis, aids in proper diagnosis, 
and helps plan treatment
BUT Schirmer Lipid Diagnosis
Normal Normal Normal NORMAL
Normal Decreased Normal ADDE ‑ PRECLINICAL
Normal Normal Decreased EDE ‑ PRECLINICAL
Normal Decreased Decreased ADDE + EDE ‑
PRECLINICAL
Decreased Decreased Normal ADDE
Decreased Normal Decreased EDE
Decreased Normal Normal SHORT BUT DE
Decreased Decreased Decreased SEVERE DRY EYE – 
ADDE + EDE
June 2022	 1891 Koh, et al.: Ocular Surface Evaluation
10.	 Clayton JA. Dry eye. N Engl J Med 2018;378:2212‑3.
11.	 Nichols KK, Nichols JJ, Mitchell GL. The lack of association between
signs and symptoms in patients with dry eye disease. Cornea
2004;23:762‑70.
12.	 Schein OD, Tielsch JM, Munõz B, Bandeen‑Roche K, West S.
Relation between signs and symptoms of dry eye in the
elderly. A population‑based perspective. Ophthalmology
1997;104:1395‑401.
13.	 Galor A, Felix ER, Feuer W, Shalabi N, Martin ER, Margolis TP,
et al. Dry eye symptoms align more closely to non‑ocular conditions
than to tear film parameters. Br J Ophthalmol 2015;99:1126‑9.
14.	 Vehof J, Sillevis Smitt‑Kamminga N, Kozareva D, Nibourg SA,
Hammond CJ. Clinical characteristics of dry eye patients with
chronic pain syndromes. Am J Ophthalmol 2016;162:59‑65.
15.	 Vehof J, Zavos HMS, Lachance G, Hammond CJ, Williams FMK.
Shared genetic factors underlie chronic pain syndromes. Pain
2014;155:1562‑8.
16.	 Vehof J, Wang B, Kozareva D, Hysi PG, Snieder H, Hammond CJ.
The heritability of dry eye disease in a female twin cohort. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:7278–83.
17.	 Wan KH, Chen LJ, Young AL. Depression and anxiety in dry
eye disease: A systematic review and meta‑analysis. Eye (Lond)
2016;30:1558‑67.
18.	 Wolffsohn JS, Arita R, Chalmers R, Djalilian A, Dogru M,
Dumbleton K,et al. TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology report.
Ocul Surf 2017;15:539–74.
19.	 Tsubota K, Yokoi N, Shimazaki J, Watanabe H, Dogru M,
Yamamda M, et al. New perspectives on dry eye definition and
diagnosis: A consensus report by the Asia Dry Eye Society. Ocul
Surf 2017;15:65–76.
20.	 Yokoi N, BronA, Tiffany J, Brown N, Hsuan J, Fowler C. Reflective
meniscometry: A non‑invasive method to measure tear meniscus
curvature. Br J Ophthalmol 1999;83:92–7.
21.	 Korb DR, Blackie CA. Meibomian gland diagnostic expressibility:
Correlation with dry eye symptoms and gland location. Cornea
2008;27:1142–7.
22.	 Szalai E, Berta A, Szekanecz Z, Szucs G, Modis L Jr. Evaluation
of tear osmolarity in non‑Sjogren and Sjogren syndrome dry eye 
patients with the TearLab system. Cornea 2012;31:867‑71.
23.	 Koh S, Watanabe H, Hosohata J, Hori Y, Hibino S, Nishida K,
et al. Diagnosing dry eye using a blue‑free barrier filter. Am J
Ophthalmol 2003;136:513‑9.
24.	 Yokoi N, Georgiev GA. Tear film‑oriented diagnosis and tear
film‑oriented therapy for dry eye based on tear film dynamics.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2018;59:DES13‑22.
25.	 Yokoi N, Georgiev GA, Kato H, Komuro A, Sonomura Y,
Sotozono C, et al. Classification of fluorescein breakup patterns:
A Novel method of differential diagnosis for dry eye. Am J
Ophthalmol 2017;180:72‑85.
26.	 Koh S, Tung CI, Inoue Y, Jhanji V. Effects of tear film dynamics on
quality of vision. Br J Ophthalmol 2018;102:1615‑20.
27.	 Craig JP, Nichols KK, Akpek EK, Caffery B, Dua HS, Joo CK, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Definition and classification report. Ocul Surf
2017;15:276‑83.
28.	 Baudouin C, Messmer EM, Aragona P, Geerling G, Akova YA,
Benitez‑del‑Castillo J, et al. Revisiting the vicious circle of dry
eye disease: A focus on the pathophysiology of meibomian gland
dysfunction. Br J Ophthalmol 2016;100:300‑6.
29.	 Aragona P, Giannaccare G, Mencucci R, Rubino P, Cantera E,
Rolando M. Modern approach to the treatment of dry eye, a
complex multifactorial disease: A P.I.C.A.S.S.O. board review. Br
J Ophthalmol 2021;105:446‑53.
30.	 Yang S, Lee HJ, Kim D, Shin S, Barabino S, Chung SH. The use of
conjunctival staining to measure ocular surface inflammation in
patients with dry eye. Cornea 2019;38:698‑705.
31.	 Meller D, Li DQ, Tseng SC. Regulation of collagenase, stromelysin
and gelatinise B in human conjunctival and conjunctivochalasis
fibroblasts by interleukin‑1beta and tumour necrosis factor‑alpha.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:2922‑9.
32.	 Epstein SP, Gadaria‑Rathod N, Wei Y, Maguire MG, Asbell PA.
HLA‑DRexpression as a biomarker ofinflammation for multicenter
clinical trials of ocular surface disease. Exp EyeRes 2013;111:95‑104.
33.	 Bose T, Hou A, Lee R, Tong L, Chandy KG. A non‑invasive way
to isolate and phenotype cells from the conjunctiva. J Vis Exp
2017;5:55591.
34.	 Nair AP, D’Souza S, Shetty R, Ahuja P, Kundu G, Khamar P, et al.
Altered ocular surface immune cell profile in patients with dry eye
disease. Ocul Surf 2021;21:96‑106.
35.	 Tong L, Wong TY, Cheng Y. Level of tear cytokines in
population‑level participants and correlation with clinical features.
Cytokine 2018;110:452‑8.
36.	 Kervick GN, Pflugfelder SC, Haimovici R, Brown H, Tozman E,
Yee R. Paracentralrheumatoid corneal ulceration. Clinical features
and cyclosporine therapy. Ophthalmology 1992;99:80‑8.
37.	 Smith J, Nichols KK, Baldwin EK. Current patterns in the use of
diagnostic tests in dry eye evaluation. Cornea 2008;27:656‑62.
38.	 Yamaguchi M, Kutsuna M, Uno T, Zheng X, Kodama T, Ohashi Y.
Marx Line: Fluorescein staining line on the innerlid as indicator of
meibomian gland dysfunction.Am J Ophthalmol 2006;141:669‑75.
