© 2023 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow
Evaporative dry eye disease due to meibomian gland dysfunction: Preferred 
practice pattern guidelines for diagnosis and treatment
Purvasha Narang, Pragnya Rao Donthineni1
, Sharon D’Souza2
, Sayan Basu1
Access this article online
Website:
www.ijo.in
DOI:
10.4103/IJO.IJO_2841_22
Quick Response Code:
Evaporative dry eye (EDE) due to meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD) is one of the common clinical 
problems encountered in ophthalmology. It is a major cause of dry eye disease (DED) and of ocular 
morbidity. In EDE, inadequate quantity or quality of lipids produced by the meibomian glands leads to 
faster evaporation of the preocular tear film and symptoms and signs of DED. Although the diagnosis is 
made using a combination of clinical features and special diagnostic test results, the management of the 
disease might be challenging as it is often difficult to distinguish EDE from other subtypes of DED. This 
is critical because the approach to the treatment of DED is guided by identifying the underlying subtype 
and cause. The traditional treatment of MGD consists of warm compresses, lid massage, and improving 
lid hygiene, all measures aimed at relieving glandular obstruction and facilitating meibum outflow. In 
recent years, newer diagnostic imaging modalities and therapies for EDE like vectored thermal pulsation 
and intense pulsed light therapy have emerged. However, the multitude of management options may 
confuse the treating ophthalmologist, and a customized rather than a generalized approach is necessary 
for these patients. This review aims to provide a simplified approach to diagnose EDE due to MGD and 
to individualize treatment for each patient. The review also emphasizes the role of lifestyle modifications 
and appropriate counseling so that patients can have realistic expectations and enjoy a better quality of life.
Key words: Dry eye disease, evaporative dry eye, meibography, meibomian gland, meibomian gland 
dysfunction
Department of Ophthalmology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Nagpur, Maharashtra, 1
The Shantilal Shanghvi Cornea Institute, LV 
Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, Telangana, 2
Department of Cornea 
and Refractive surgery, Narayana Nethralaya Eye Hospital, Bengaluru, 
Karnataka, India
Correspondence to: Dr. Sayan Basu, Director and Prof. 
D Balasubramanian Chair of Eye Research, Prof. Brien 
Holden Eye Research Centre, LV Prasad Eye Institute, 
Hyderabad, Telangana, India. E‑mail: sayanbasu@lvpei.org
Dr. Sharon D’Souza, Department of Cornea and Refractive surgery, 
Narayana Nethralaya Eye Hospital, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India. 
E‑mail: drsharondsouza@gmail.com
Received: 26-Oct-2022 Revision: 04-Jan-2023
Accepted: 27-Jan-2023 Published: 05-Apr-2023
Inflammatory damage to the ocular surface, tear film instability, 
neurosensory abnormalities, and hyperosmolarity all play a part 
in the development of dry eye disease (DED), a multifactorial 
disease of the ocular surface, which is characterized by a 
loss of tear film homeostasis and is accompanied by ocular 
symptoms.[1] For classification, determining the predominant DED 
subtype (aqueous‑deficient or evaporative) is crucial. While the 
second dry eye workshop organized by the tear film and ocular 
surface society (TFOS DEWS II) stated that these subtypes are 
believed to be a part of a spectrum of disease rather than being 
distinct pathophysiological entities, the therapeutic principles 
are still guided by identifying the main underlying cause.[1]
Although these subtypes can coexist in around 40% of cases,[2]
aqueous‑deficient DED (ADDE) occurs due to lacrimal gland 
insufficiency,[3] while the main underlying pathology in evaporative 
dry eye (EDE) is meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD).
According to the international workshop on MGD, it is a 
chronic, generalized disorder of the meibomian glands that is 
frequently characterized by terminal duct obstruction and/or 
qualitative/quantitative alterations in the secretion of the glands.[4]
EDE due to MGD is perhaps one of the commonest problems 
encountered by ophthalmologists. In India, hospital‑based 
studies have reported its prevalence ranging from 42.5% to 
57.2%.[2,5,6] There have been significant recent developments in 
newer diagnostic imaging techniques and therapies for MGD.
[7] The multitude of diagnostic platforms and treatment options 
available can confuse the treating ophthalmologist. It may also 
be challenging for general ophthalmologists to differentiate 
EDE from other forms of DED and tailoring the treatment to an 
individual patient rather than using a generalized approach. 
This review aims to provide a simplified and logical approach 
for the management of EDE due to MGD, which is appropriate 
for use in our daily clinical practice.
Etiopathogenesis and definition of EDE due to MGD
The term “meibomian gland disease” encompasses MGD as well 
as congenital, neoplastic, and other conditions of the meibomian 
glands. Other terms used earlier to describe MGD are meibomitis, 
meibomianitis, and posterior blepharitis. The underlying 
pathophysiology of MGD is primary obstructive hypertrophy 
of the meibomian duct epithelium and keratinization of the 
circular orifice epithelium leading to terminal duct obstruction, 
Cite this article as: Narang P, Donthineni PR, D’Souza S, Basu S. Evaporative 
dry eye disease due to meibomian gland dysfunction: Preferred practice pattern 
guidelines for diagnosis and treatment. Indian J Ophthalmol 2023;71:1348-56.
This is an open access journal, and articles are distributed under the terms of 
the Creative Commons Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 4.0 License, 
which allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially, 
as long as appropriate credit is given and the new creations are licensed under 
the identical terms.
For reprints contact: WKHLRPMedknow_reprints@wolterskluwer.com
Preferred Practice
April 2023 1349 Narang, et al.: Evaporative dry eye disease
abnormal meibomian gland secretion, eyelid inflammation, 
corneal inflammation and damage, microbiological changes, 
and EDE. Although MGD can be further subcategorized into 
hypersecretory, hyposecretory, and obstructive forms, the 
obstructive type of MGD is the commonest form, and for the 
purpose of this review, further reference to MGD shall be in 
context of the obstructive type only.[8] The terms MGD and 
EDE are also often used synonymously, since there are few 
other causes of EDE; however, in this review, we will use the 
term “EDE due to MGD” to allude to the clinical disease and 
differentiate it from subclinical MGD without obvious EDE.
Risk factors of EDE due to MGD
Several ophthalmic and systemic factors have been implicated 
as risk factors in the development of EDE due to MGD. Age 
is an important risk factor for MGD, and there is an increase 
in the prevalence of EDE with age.[2,9] Other ocular risk factors 
include anterior blepharitis, contact lens wear, eye make‑up 
or cosmetics, and demodex infestation; the systemic risk 
factors are androgen deficiency, menopause, rosacea, atopic 
dermatitis, seborrheic dermatitis, hypertension, smoking, 
alcohol consumption, and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH): 
systemic medications like antiandrogens, medications for 
treating BPH, hormone replacement therapy (postmenopausal 
estrogens and progestins), antihistamines, antidepressants, and 
retinoids.[9‑11] There is also a correlation between higher screen 
time or exposure to visual display units and the development of 
MGD.[12‑14] When using a computer or other similar device, most 
people blink up to 60% less frequently than when not using a 
computer screen. Reduced blinking rate causes the secretions 
from the meibomian glands to be emptied less frequently, 
which may eventually result in gland blockage and malfunction 
of the glands leading to EDE. Incomplete or partial blinks lead 
to tear film instability by reducing the quantity of secretion of 
meibum and improper distribution of lipids in the tear film.
Diagnosis of DED
The first step in the management is establishing the diagnosis 
of DED and confirming EDE due to MGD as the cause. Patients 
may have MGD without manifest EDE, and in these cases, 
preventive measures need to be prescribed, while patients 
with symptomatic EDE due to MGD will need treatment. The 
diagnosis is based on a combination of symptoms, basic clinical 
examination, and special diagnostic tests.
Symptoms: Patients presenting with complaints of foreign 
body sensation, ocular discomfort, burning, tearing, irritation, 
sensitivity to light, blurring of vision that improves on 
blinking, and limitation of daily activities like inability to work 
continuously on a computer screen may be suffering from 
some form of DED. These DED symptoms are nonspecific for 
the underlying etiology. However, occupational history of 
excessive digital device usage and prolonged working hours in 
low‑humidity environments in a young adult may point toward 
an evaporative etiology. Ocular and systemic drug history has to 
be noted, especially the use of isotretinoin for acne treatment or 
the use of hormone replacement therapy. Asthenopic symptoms 
may coexist if there is a presence of DED or “Computer Vision 
Syndrome” (CVS) too. Questionnaires like Ocular Surface 
Disease Index (OSDI), dry eye questionnaire (DEQ), or 
SPEED questionnaires may be useful to quantify the patient’s 
symptomatology and are valuable for research but are not 
mandatory in routine clinical practice.
Signs: Patients presenting with a history and symptoms 
suggestive of DED, as mentioned above, should then be 
subjected to a detailed clinical examination. This includes 
a quick physical examination, slit‑lamp examination of 
the eyes, simple office tests, and some special diagnostics. 
The diagnosis committee of the International Workshop on 
MGD recommends a sequence of tests, like tear film breakup 
time (TBUT), ocular surface staining, Schirmer’s score, and tear 
volume, to differentiate between MGD‑related evaporative 
DED and ADDE [Table 1].[15,16] Any patient with symptoms 
of DED with positive ocular surface fluorescein or lissamine 
green staining, along with low Schirmer’s test scores and/or 
low TBUT (<10 s), should be considered as a case of DED and 
treated as such. These basic tests are described first followed 
by additional investigations to differentiate EDE and ADDE.
Ocular surface staining: Ocular surface damage associated 
with tear film instability can be quantified by fluorescein staining 
of the cornea and lissamine green staining of conjunctiva (Oxford 
scheme and DEWS scheme). MGD shows staining more along 
the upper and lower lid margins [Fig. 1], whereas ADDE more 
often causes interpalpebral corneal staining.
TBUT: TBUT is a surrogate indicator of tear film stability. Using 
fluorescein, its normal value is more than 15 s; 10–15 s is considered 
borderline; scores less than 10 s may indicate an inadequate 
balance between the mucoaqueous and lipid layers of the tear 
film. However, it does not differentiate between EDE and ADDE.
Clinical clues suggestive of EDE due to MGD
Face: In addition to the ocular and lid features, it is important 
to look for features of dermatological diseases like acne 
rosacea and seborrheic dermatitis. Ocular rosacea is a highly 
underdiagnosed condition and needs an additional degree of 
suspicion. Almost 90% of ocular rosacea patients (8–50% of all 
rosacea cases) show eyelid changes including MGD and lid 
margin inflammation.[16]
Lids: Examination of the lid margin for any irregularities 
like thickening, telangiectasia, vascularity, changes in the 
mucocutaneous junction, collarettes, presence of frothy 
secretions collected over the lid margin, distichiasis, trichiasis, 
keratinization, cicatricial changes, and notching is essential 
to not only diagnose the condition but also to estimate the 
chronicity of the disease and rule out other lid related diseases. 
In addition, blink rate, extent of lid excursion, and presence of 
incomplete or partial blinks are also important determinants 
of the tear film spread and stability. Abnormality of the eyelid 
margin can be graded based on lid margin irregularity, vascular 
engorgement, and glandular orifice obstruction.[15,17]
Meibomian glands: While diagnosing MGD, meibomian 
gland expression (quantity, quality, and expressibility of 
meibum) and areas of gland dropout are looked for on slit‑lamp 
biomicroscopy.[17] Meibum quality and expressibility are 
assessed by applying appropriate digital pressure or using a 
special handheld instrument to provide standardized force 
over the eyelid.[18] Usually, all gland openings should be patent 
and adequate clear fluid is expressed out of the openings. 
However, in MGD, changes in meibomian lipid composition, 
such as increased monounsaturated fatty acids and modified 
fatty acid composition, lead to abnormal lipid behavior like 
a higher meibum melting temperature resulting in thicker 
meibum, ductal plugging, capping, stagnation, and pouting 
of the meibomian gland orifices.[19,20] [Fig. 1b].
Additional diagnostic tests of EDE evaluation
Meibography: Noncontact infrared photography (either by 
commercially available dedicated meibography devices or by 
1350 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
infrared cameras of the autorefractometer) [Fig. 2] facilitates 
assessment of morphological features of the meibomian gland 
in vivo. Meibomian gland loss or meibomian gland dropout 
refers to the loss of acinar tissue detected by meibography.[21,22]
The characteristics noted on meibography include gland 
distortion, gland shortening, and gland dropout, which can 
be scored [Fig. 2 and 3].[23] According to the DREAM study, 
meibomian gland loss was significantly less in the upper lid 
than in the lower lid in patients with DED. Therefore, it is 
important to evaluate both the upper and lower eyelids as 
assuming that findings from the upper lid are the same as 
those from the lower lid is not warranted.[24] A study of the 
morphological variants of meibomian glands showed the 
presence of hooked, tortuous, and overlapping glands that 
had completely normal glandular histology, whereas severely 
short glands showed atrophic changes with loss of meibocyte 
differentiation and cellular proliferation [Fig. 2]. Total loss of 
glandular elements was seen in dropout areas, suggesting that 
there can be a lot of variation in the morphology and length 
of the meibomian glands even in the normal population.[25]
Noninvasive tear film break up time (NIBUT): Some 
believe that instilling fluorescein dye is intrusive because it 
can itself cause instability in the tear film. Thus, NIBUT, a 
placido disc‑based noncontact evaluation of the tear film, was 
developed [Fig. 1]. Since TBUT and NIBUT levels have been 
proven to be significantly different in studies, these values 
cannot be utilized interchangeably. Overall, if the technology is 
available, it is better to use the average result of several NIBUT 
measurements.[26‐28] Typically in EDE, NIBUT is less than 7-10 
seconds. However, similar to TBUT, a low NIBUT alone cannot 
distinguish between DED subtypes.[29]
Lipid layer thickness: The thickness of the normal tear 
film lipid layer (TFLL), the most anterior part of the tear film, 
Table 1: Preferred sequence of clinical and diagnostics tests and differentiation between the evaporative dry eye (EDE)
and aqueous deficient dry eye (ADDE)
Sequence of Tests Asymptomatic MGD EDE due to MGD ADDE
Higher scores on symptom questionnaire (DEQ/SPEED/OSDI) X ✔️ ✔️
Decreased lower tear meniscus height on slit‑lamp biomicroscopy X X ✔️
Abnormal tear osmolarity (if available) X ✔️ ✔️
Presence of corneal and conjunctival fluorescein staining X ✔️ ✔️
Lower Schirmer’s test without anesthesia (or phenol red thread test) X X ✔️
Presence of morphologic lid features ✔️ ✔️ X
Changes in meibum expressibility and quality ✔️ ✔️ X
Presence of MG dropout on meibography X/✔️ ✔️ X
Normal direct examination of the palpebral lobe of the lacrimal gland ✔️ ✔️ X
Figure 1: (a) Typical pattern of corneal fluorescein staining seen under cobalt blue illumination on slit‑lamp biomicroscopy in the inferior quadrant 
adjacent to the lid margin in a case of evaporative dry eye due to meibomian gland dysfunction. (b) Pouting and blocked meibomian gland orifices 
along the lower lid margin. (c) Reduced tear meniscus height (TMH) as measured by the Keratograph. (d) Infrared imaging of the lids shows 
areas of meibomian gland dropouts, gland distortion or tortuosity, and gland shortening. (e) Non‑invasive‑Keratograph‑break‑up time (NIKBUT) 
showing abnormal value and pattern
d
c b
a e
April 2023 1351 Narang, et al.: Evaporative dry eye disease
Figure 3: Presence of telangiectatic vessels over the lid margin surrounding the meibomian gland orifices of the upper eyelid and blocked and 
capped orifices of the lower lid. Meibography showing areas of blocked meibomian glands and their loss or dropouts (marked in the oval)
Figure 2: Representative photographs of progressive degrees of meibomian gland loss (a‑ f), as seen in decreasing number of glands and 
increase in areas of gland dropouts
d c
b
f
a
e
is approximately 20–160 nm.[30] Lipid layer thickness (LLT) 
measurement is used to assess thickness, spread time, 
spread rate, and pattern by broad‑spectrum white light 
interferometry. On recording the movement of particles in 
the film by interferometry, the lipid layer is seen to spread 
upward (primarily from the lower reservoir) in the upstroke 
of the blink and stabilizes after approximately 1–2 s.[31] This 
changes to 3.54 ± 1.86 s in eyes with lipid tear deficiency.[32]
Thinning of the TFLL has been noted in lipid tear deficiency.[33]
In normal subjects, the relatively constant appearance of the 
interferometric pattern of the TFLL over several blink cycles 
implies the conservation of its architecture from blink to blink. 
1352 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
This cycle of stability is shortened in MGD and has been 
proposed as a measure of MGD‑related disease in the dynamic 
lipid layer interference pattern test.[34,35]
Biomarkers of inflammation: Various inflammatory 
biomarkers like cytokines and other mediators (TNF‑a, IL‑6, 
IL‑17a, and IL‑8, secretory phospholipase A2, prostaglandin E2, 
etc.), interleukins; matrix metalloproteinases (MMP‑9), Human 
Leukocytic Antigen- DR isotype (HLA‑DR) expression, can be 
tested by tear sampling or impression cytology and have been 
found to be deranged in DED.[36] Tests of tear osmolarity and 
MMP‑9 are available as point‐of‐care objective metrics.[36] These 
tear film biomarkers have utility in research studies in DED to 
detect the level of ocular surface inflammation and to evaluate 
response to therapy in DED due to MGD. However, they may 
not have relevance in routine clinical practice.
In vitro confocal microscopy (IVCM): The confocal 
laser‑scanning microscope (HRT II RCM Heidelberg Engineering 
Inc., Heidelberg, Germany, Rostock Cornea Module) is a 
relatively newer diagnostic modality for MGD. On assessment, 
increased acinar unit diameter with decreased mean acinar unit 
density (number of glands/mm2
) was found in the MGD group 
as compared to the control group. The images also indicated 
that acinar unit enlargement was due to the inspissation of 
meibum secretions and glandular atrophy with periglandular 
fibrosis.[37] In another study, severe MGD patients have shown 
higher corneal nerve reflectivity. Total symptom score negatively 
correlated with nerve density while positively correlated with 
nerve reflectivity and dendritic cell density.[38] Reduced nerve 
density with alteration of subbasal nerve plexus features may 
be associated with neuropathic pain or dysesthesia due to 
sensitization of peripheral nerve endings or exposure of the nerves 
to inflammatory cytokines. IVCM may be of great value in imaging 
resident Demodex mites in the meibomian gland orifices.[39]
Tests to rule out ADDE
Schirmer’s test: One end of the Whatman 41 filter paper 
strip (5 mm wide and 35 mm long) is placed over the lateral third 
of the lower eyelid in each eye. The patient may continue blinking 
normally or keep the eyes closed. After 5 min, the examiner 
removes the strips and measures the length of strip wet by tears. 
To measure the total tear secretion (basal and reflex tear secretion), 
it is performed without anesthesia and values of more than 15mm 
are normal; 5–10 mm are borderline, and less than 5 mm are 
severely abnormal. This is an indicator of the ADDE component 
of DED. Schirmer’s test is normal in EDE.
Lacrimal gland evaluation: Differentiating between ADDE 
and other DED causes requires a direct examination of the 
palpebral lobe of the lacrimal gland. When performing a 
slit‑lamp examination, the palpebral lobe of the lacrimal gland 
can be evaluated by having the patient look inferonasally as 
the examiner holds the upper eyelid superotemporally. The 
palpebral lobe has a convex form, a smooth surface, and a 
pinkish appearance in healthy people and people with EDE, 
but in people with ADDE, the lobe shrinks, flattens out, and 
occasionally develops regions of fibrosis.[40] As a result of 
symblepharon in cicatrizing conjunctivitis, the gland area is 
usually not visible. A fluorescein strip placed over the exposed 
lobe area can also assess tear flow, known as “Direct assessment 
of tear secretion” or DATS, from the palpebral lobe of the 
lacrimal gland.[41] There is a considerable decrease in tear flow 
in ADDE, while in EDE, it is similar to healthy eyes.
Tear volume: Tear meniscus height (TMH) under a slit‑lamp 
or anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) 
are two methods for measuring tear volume. OCT‑based 
TMH measurement is more accurate and repeatable than 
slit‑lamp‑based evaluation [Fig. 1]. Even with OCT, the value 
can vary greatly depending on the operator, the time since the 
last blink, the amount of fluorescein previously instilled, the 
time of day, lighting, temperature, and ambient humidity.[42,43]
According to TFOS‑DEWS II criteria, the TMH cut off of 0.2 mm 
provided 98.3% sensitivity and 96.7% specificity in participants 
who were diagnosed with ADDE.[44]
Staging of MGD
The abnormality of the eyelid margin (Lid Margin Score) is 
assessed by the following three factors: lid margin irregularity, 
vascular engorgement, and glandular orifice obstruction 
assigned one score each. Meibomian gland expression 
(MG expressibility) is scored according to the secretion seen 
in all five meibomian glands: 0, all glands; 1 (3–4 glands); 2 
(1–2 glands); and 3 (no glands).[15] Meibum quality (Meibum 
score) is graded as: 0 (clear); 1 (cloudy); 2 (cloudy with debris); 
and 3 (inspissated, toothpaste‑like). Subjectively, the Meiboscore 
is defined by using the four‑point grading scale (0–3): 0 
(no dropout); 1 (<1/3 total area dropout); 2 (1/3–2/3 total area 
dropout); and 3 (>2/3 total area dropout).[45] Semiobjectively, 
MG dropout is measured and expressed as the percentage 
when the areas of MG loss are divided by the total area of the 
everted eyelid.[46] Finally, the total score of the MG grading 
examinations is calculated (MG score), as an integrated 
evaluation of the meibomian gland and ranges from 0 to 12. The 
severity of MGD can be staged using the degree of symptoms, 
grade of MG involvement, surface staining, and coexisting and 
accompanying disorders of the ocular surface (Plus disease).[8]
Treatment
Early treatment during the asymptomatic stage of MGD may 
delay progression to the symptomatic stage and reverse the 
pathological events of MGD.[15] In the presence of “plus” 
disease, where MGD may develop in association with ocular 
surface disease, or secondary to other ocular disorders, 
concurrent management of comorbid conditions according 
to standard‑of‑care protocols may be required.[8,47] Based on 
the coexistence of ADDE and MGD, the approach to treating 
patients with various degrees of both these diseases is crafted.
Lifestyle modifications to optimize the work/home 
environment: Intake of a healthy diet, improvement in 
body hydration status, adoption of methods to decrease 
excessive when the evaporation of tear film, to avoid hot, dry 
environments and to add moisture to the ambient air using a 
humidifier is advocated; direct blast from air‑conditioning or 
heating vents at home, at work or while driving or traveling in 
air‑conditioned vehicles, is to be avoided. Wraparound‑style 
glasses on windy days and goggles while swimming should 
be worn. Smoking and passive smoking are to be avoided.
Lid hygiene, warm compresses, lid massage, and gland 
expression: The effective conventional treatment of MGD 
consists of the application of warm compresses, improving 
lid hygiene and removing the obstructed meibum by gentle 
massage and expression. The melting point of meibum increases 
in MGD (35°C) as compared to non‑MGD (32°C) because of its 
altered lipid composition. The obstruction of ducts with thick 
meibomian secretions leads to a stagnant and less dynamic 
tear film. Increased eyelid temperature helps by decreasing 
the lipid viscosity, and hence increasing lipid levels of the tear 
film.[48] This is ideally followed by moderate to firm digital 
massage of the lids and expression of thicker meibum, thus 
April 2023 1353 Narang, et al.: Evaporative dry eye disease
Intense pulsed light (IPL): IPL therapy uses a noncoherent 
polychromatic light source with a broad wavelength spectrum 
of 500–1200 nm and is used for aesthetic or therapeutic purposes 
in Dermatology.[50] The photothermal effect helps decrease 
inflammation of the glands and improvement in telangiectasia.[51]
However, the exact mechanism of action is still unclear. This is 
applied through the skin, and the waves get absorbed into the 
blood vessels near the skin’s surface.[52] These waves are then 
taken up by the oxy‑hemoglobin in the blood cells, leading to 
local heat generation and coagulation, leading to blood vessel 
thrombosis. Patients also experience decreased redness due to 
the resolution of abnormal telangiectatic vessels. Further, IPL 
also has some antibacterial effects on the treated area.
Vectored thermal pulsation: The goal of the treatment of 
MGD is to improve the flow of meibomian gland secretions, 
thus improving tear film stability. Relieving meibomian gland 
obstruction is also vital for a successful treatment. In advanced 
cases, heat and eyelid massage may not be able to cure the 
disease completely. Lid massage provides partial and temporary 
relief of obstruction of the meibomian glands and could be 
painful too. These treatments may be frustrating for patients and 
ophthalmologists alike. With conventional warm compresses, 
heat reaches the outer surface of the eyelid only and may be 
of limited effectiveness for the blocked meibum in the glands 
in the tarsal plate. With LipiFlow® treatment (TearScience®, 
Morrisville, NC, USA), heat can be applied to both the upper and 
lower palpebral conjunctival surfaces in addition to pulsating 
pressure to the external eyelid at the same time to express 
the thick meibum from the meibomian glands, thus clearing 
meibomian gland obstruction in a two‑pronged way.[53]
Each eye receives vectored thermal pulsation for 12 min. 
As a temperature‑ and pressure‑controlled device, this novel 
treatment for obstructive MGD has combined the benefits 
of both heat therapy and physical expression. No pressure 
is transmitted directly onto the eyeball.[54] Adverse effects in 
the form of eyelid pain, moderate conjunctival congestion, 
and ocular burning symptoms were reported but resolved in 
4 weeks without treatment. A statistically significant mean 
clearing the meibomian gland ducts blockage, allowing the 
meibomian glands to produce normal secretions. However, 
this is a time‑consuming and labor‑intensive therapy and leads 
to compliance issues and, finally, lower treatment efficacy. For 
more inspissated meibum causing severe obstruction, treatment 
with a manual expression of meibomian glands is done carefully 
by the clinician using atraumatic specialized expressor forceps.
Lubricant therapy: Even though the use of artificial lubricants 
or artificial tears (AT) is not the mainstay of treating MGD, 
the supplementation of the tear film can address the “final 
common pathway” that mediates a wide range of ocular surface 
diseases, including EDE (with or without MGD) and aqueous 
deficient dry eye. The use of emollients in the lubricants may 
be helpful to a certain extent, e.g., petrolatum, mineral oil, 
castor oil, hydroxypropyl guar, and sodium hyaluronate. 
Evidence for treating mixed forms of DED supports the usage of 
higher‑viscosity artificial lubricants in the form of eye drops or 
gels. However, viscosity should be balanced with a risk of visual 
blurring. Lubricant eye ointment should be used at bedtime for 
symptomatic relief as ointments last for a longer duration as 
compared to eye drops. Also, preservative‑induced epithelial 
toxicity has been reported using detergent‑type preservatives, e.g., 
benzalkonium chloride and may be reduced by using so‑called 
vanishing preservatives like sodium chlorite or sodium perborate, 
1.5%. There is also an increase in the use of lipid‑containing 
eye drops or liposomal sprays in some countries. The use of 
conventional antibiotic eye ointments, with mineral oil or soft 
paraffin base, may also act as topical lipid supplements in EDE 
or MGD, as they contain both polar and nonpolar lipids. Ongoing 
studies consider the utility of emulsion or nano‑emulsion‑based 
eye drops, and ointments with tear interference imaging show 
rapid restructuring of the preexisting lipid tear film.
MiBo thermoflow: MiBo thermoflow (MIBO Medical Group, 
Dallas, TX, USA) is a model of an electronic heating device, 
which can warm, massage, and empty clogged meibomian 
glands on both upper and lower lids simultaneously.[49] The 
device has an external paddle heated to 42.2°C and applied 
with a gel buffer to the eyelids.
Table 2: Advantages and disadvantages of IPL and LipiFlow
Characteristics IPL LipiFlow
Automated system ✔️ ✔️
Treatment tool Pulsed light Thermal pulses and vectored massage
Number of sittings Need 2‑4 sessions to obtain optimal results One session (12–15 min) only
Topical anesthesia X ✔️
Pain X X
Cost Lesser cost High cost of each treatment
Use of postprocedure medications for a lasting relief ✔️ ✔️
Type of eye dryness Moderate to severe Mild to moderate
Improvement of symptoms Yes Yes (less consistent)
Antimicrobial effect ✔ X
Long‑term effect ✔️ ✔️
Reduction in the appearance of wrinkles and rosacea ✔️ X
Type of skin All skin types if paired with LLLT treatment All skin types
Post‑treatment recovery time None None
Need for post‑treatment artificial tears Significantly reduced Necessary
Contraindicated in a patient using photosensitizing 
drugs
Yes No
Use in pregnant patient X ✔️
1354 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
decrease in corneal staining from baseline to 2 weeks and 
4 weeks was observed.[53] It has shown marked improvement 
in symptoms and signs (based on TBUT, corneal fluorescein 
staining, and meibomian gland secretion scores).[55] However, 
not all MGD cases are suitable for this treatment. Patients 
with widespread MGL can, thus, be identified as unsuitable 
for such therapies like vectored thermal pulsation and 
mechanical expression of the liquefied meibum. Table 2 lists 
the advantages and disadvantages of IPL and LipiFlow. It is 
also important to understand that multiple sessions of these 
modalities may be required in some cases and that these are not 
magic bullets or “one‑shot” miracle cures for EDE due to MGD.
Intraductal meibomian gland probing is a relatively 
nontraumatic, slit‐lamp‐based procedure where mechanical 
opening and dilatation of the natural orifices and ducts of the 
meibomian glands and removal of abnormal meibum secretions are 
performed, leading to rapid and lasting relief of MGD symptoms.[56]
Under topical anesthesia, patients are treated with the 2mm probe 
at the slit lamp initially. Then, the 4 mm probe is subsequently 
used for deeper probing. Post probing, reestablishment of orifice 
and central ducts leads to relief of symptoms. Some disadvantages 
such as variable discomfort and orifice hemorrhage maybe seen 
during the procedure but resolve eventually.[57]
Following any meibomian gland‑targeted intervention for 
MGD, like probing, thermal vectored treatment, or IPL, the 
patient needs topical medications, frequent lid hygiene, and 
continuation of warm compresses to prevent blocking of the 
meibomian ducts and easy expression of meibum.
Oral tetracycline/doxycycline: If chronic symptoms and signs 
of MGD are not adequately controlled by eyelid cleansing or 
meibomian gland expression (especially in patients with ocular 
rosacea), daily oral doxycycline, minocycline, or tetracycline 
may be helpful and tapered when clinical improvement 
is documented.[58] These drugs limit bacterial colonization 
and reduce inflammation of the lid margin. In women of 
childbearing age and children less than 8 years of age, these 
may be substituted by oral erythromycin or azithromycin.[59]
The side‑effect profile and contraindications for the use of 
tetracyclines should be kept in mind while prescribing them.
Topical antibiotic (azithromycin) ointment: Commensal 
and other lid bacteria (like Staphylococcus epidermidis, 
Staphylococcus aureus, Propionibacterium acnes, etc.) produce 
lipolytic enzymes (lipases and esterases), hydrolyze the 
meibum lipids, increase their melting temperature, and release 
free fatty acids and inflammatory mediators to destabilize the 
tear film.[60] Topical azithromycin, a broad‑spectrum macrolide 
antibiotic, is a potentially effective and well‑tolerated treatment 
for MGD, leading to clinical control or relief of symptoms 
and signs of MGD, improvement in meibomian gland orifice 
plugging, favorable tissue penetration to the eyelid, good 
pharmacokinetics for a daily dose, and a sustained delivery 
mechanism system with potent ocular anti‑inflammatory 
properties (decreased inflammatory cytokine levels such as 
interleukin‑6 and interleukin‑8), as well as improvement in 
lipid behavior of meibomian gland secretion.[61‑63]
Oral omega‑3 fatty acids: Modifying dietary lipid intake can 
influence meibum lipid composition as a treatment of MGD. 
Therefore, it is recommended that oral supplementation with 
omega‑3 essential fatty acids could be a possible MGD therapy 
in improving some clinical symptoms and signs, as well as 
changes in meibum content.[64] The breakdown of omega‑3 
essential fatty acids in the body may lead to suppression of 
inflammation, whereas the breakdown of omega‑6 essential fatty 
acids produces molecules promoting inflammation.[65] Omega‑3 
and omega‑6 fatty acids compete for the same enzymes in the 
inflammatory pathway, mediated by the anti‑inflammatory 
agents. So, the metabolism of omega‑3 essential fatty acids could 
inhibit the metabolism of omega‑6 essential fatty acids, thus 
leading to decreased proinflammatory cascade in the eyelid. 
However, patients who were given supplements containing 
3000 mg of n‑3 fatty acids for 12 months did not fare any better 
than those who received a placebo.[66]
Topical anti‑inflammatory therapy with corticosteroids: Classic 
anti‑inflammatory treatments are used in combination with lid 
hygiene, warm compresses, and topical antibiotics for a short time 
in MGD with posterior eyelid margin inflammation.[37] Topical 
cyclosporine and/or punctal plugs may also be helpful in managing 
coexisting aqueous tear deficiency. Topical anti‑inflammatory 
therapy with corticosteroids has shown to be effective in the 
treatment of severe MGD by suppressing the migration of 
inflammatory cells and inhibiting the release of several cytokines.[67]
However, corticosteroids might induce some complications such as 
cataracts, steroid‑induced ocular hypertension, and opportunistic 
superinfections and must be used with caution and supervision.
Recalcitrant cases: In a certain subset of patients, symptoms 
may be severe and unaccompanied by equivalent signs. This 
is sometimes referred to as “corneal pain without stain” with 
normal tear film parameters and is often misdiagnosed as 
DED. It is postulated to be due to injury to or disease of the 
peripheral corneal nerves. A “proparacaine challenge test” can 
be used to distinguish between central and peripheral nervous 
system origins for ocular neuropathic pain to determine 
treatments. If a patient experiences complete or partial relief 
with topical 0.5% proparacaine hydrochloride, a peripheral 
or combined form, respectively, may be diagnosed. If there 
is no relief or a worsening of symptoms, then the patient has 
central sensitization of pain and is very challenging to treat.[68]
In patients with recalcitrant blepharitis not responding to 
therapy, the possibility of carcinoma or immune‑mediated 
diseases should be considered, particularly if the blepharitis 
is associated with a loss of eyelashes, nodular mass, and/or 
conjunctival cicatricial changes along with localized crusting 
and scaling of the dermis. Early diagnosis and appropriate 
treatment can prevent disfigurement and may be lifesaving. 
Ulceration, extensive scarring, lash loss, or yellow conjunctival 
nodules surrounded by intense inflammation may suggest 
the presence of an eyelid tumor. The most frequently 
encountered malignant tumors involving the eyelids are basal 
cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, melanoma, and 
sebaceous carcinoma. Moderate to severe cases with pain, 
or cases unresponsive to treatment or with visual loss, or 
orbital involvement or systemic disease are suspected; timely 
referral to a specialist ophthalmologist who is knowledgeable 
and experienced in the management of these entities is 
recommended. Pediatric patients should be referred sooner.
Counseling and Preventive Aspects
One of the most important aspects of caring for patients with EDE 
due to MGD is the need to give them more “clinic chair time”. It is 
important to explain the chronic nature of EDE, its pathogenesis, 
and the deleterious effects of multiple physician consultations 
or “doctor shopping” without complying with treatment. It 
is imperative for patients to have realistic expectations (e.g., 
symptoms may relatively improve but can rarely be eliminated), 
and they should be conducive to lifestyle modifications if 
diagnosed with MGD. This includes changes in diet and 
April 2023 1355 Narang, et al.: Evaporative dry eye disease
work/home environments like improving ambient humidity 
to minimize tear evaporation. The patients should also be 
educated about the possible contributory effect of their systemic 
medications and about the warning signs of surface damage 
which they need to watch out for. Contact lens wearers should 
be cautioned about the chances of developing intolerance and the 
risk of corneal infection if the associated MGD does not receive 
appropriate treatment.[69] Emphasis should be laid on frequent 
follow‑ups and immediate return to the clinic in the presence 
of any warning signs in the eyes. The patient’s compliance and 
understanding of the disease must be periodically reassessed 
to prevent a vicious cycle of dissatisfaction. A small subset of 
patients may even benefit from professional counseling as an aid 
in coping with the chronic disease state. Pre‑ and postoperative 
gentle and patient counseling and treatment may be necessary 
for patients undergoing a cataract or refractive surgery. In 
patients with MGD and coexistent CVS, it is advisable to follow 
the 20‑20‑20 rule and perform “strategic blinking,” which means 
to take frequent short blinking breaks when engaging in activities 
that typically precipitate symptoms, like excessive screen usage. 
It may also be beneficial to adjust the display screen’s brightness, 
use appropriate viewing angulation, enable night mode in digital 
devices, use ambient light or background illumination, and to 
switch over to e‑book readers and try to limit or decrease screen 
time and practice “squeeze blinking.”
Conclusion
Although a common condition that affects millions worldwide, 
the management of EDE due to MGD remains challenging. 
It is not unusual for a treating ophthalmologist to become 
perplexed by the variety of diagnostic tools and therapeutic 
options available. Additionally, it may be difficult to distinguish 
EDE from other types of DED and to customize treatment for 
each patient rather than taking a broad approach. This review 
is specifically intended for general ophthalmologists to orient 
them toward helping them diagnose EDE, differentiate it from 
ADDE, and provide a simplified treatment approach including 
the adequate emphasis on prevention and patient counseling.
Financial support and sponsorship
Hyderabad Eye Research Foundation (HERF), Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Craig JP, Nichols KK, Akpek EK, Caffery B, Dua HS, Joo CK,
et al. TFOS DEWS II definition and classification report. Ocul Surf 
2017;15:276‑83.
2. Donthineni PR, Kammari P, Shanbhag SS, Singh V, DasAV, Basu S. 
Incidence, demographics, types and risk factors of dry eye disease 
in India: Electronic medical records driven big data analytics report 
I. Ocul Surf 2019;17:250‑6.
3. Doctor MB, Basu S. Lacrimal gland insufficiency in aqueous 
deficiency dry eye disease: Recent Advances in pathogenesis, 
diagnosis, and treatment. Semin Ophthalmol 2022;37:801‑12.
4. Nelson JD, Shimazaki J, Benitez‑del‑Castillo JM, Craig JP, 
McCulley JP, Den S, et al. The international workshop on meibomian 
gland dysfunction: Report of the definition and classification 
subcommittee. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:1930‑7.
5. ChatterjeeS, AgrawalD, SharmaA. Meibomian gland dysfunction in 
a hospital‑based population in central India. Cornea 2020;39:634‑9.
6. Yadav S, Gupta N, Makwana T, Vanathi M, Tandon R. Noninvasive 
ocular surface analyzer as an adjunct in diagnosis and estimating 
prevalence of meibomian gland dysfunction: Hospital‑based 
comparative study. Ind J Ophthalmol 2022;70:1539‑45.
7. Narang, P. Commentary: Meibomian gland dysfunction: Taking 
a deep dive into the ocular surface parameters. Ind J Ophthalmol 
2022;70:1548.
8. Nichols KK, Foulks GN, BronAJ, Glasgow BJ, Dogru M, Tsubota K, 
et al. The International Workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: 
Executive summary. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:1922‑9.
9. Stapleton F, Alves M, Bunya VY, Jalbert I, Lekhanont K, Malet F, 
et al. TFOS DEWS II epidemiology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:334‑65.
10. Sullivan DA, Rocha EM, Aragona P, Clayton JA, Ding J, 
Golebiowski B, et al. TFOS DEWS II sex, gender, and hormones 
report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:284‑333.
11. Gomes JAP, Azar DT, Baudouin C, Efron N, Hirayama M, 
Horwath‑Winter J, et al. TFOS DEWS II iatrogenic report. Ocul 
Surf 2017;15:511‑38.
12. Wu H, Wang Y, Dong N, Yang F, Lin Z, Shang X, et al. Meibomian 
gland dysfunction determines the severity of the dry eye conditions 
in visual display terminal workers. PLoS One 2014;9:e105575.
13. Fenga C, Aragona P, Cacciola A, Spinella R, Di Nola C, Ferreri F, 
et al. Meibomian gland dysfunction and ocular discomfort in video 
display terminal workers. Eye (Lond) 2008;22:91–5.
14. Mehra D, Galor A. Digital screen use and dry eye: A review. Asia 
Pac J Ophthalmol (Phila) 2020;9:491‑7.
15. Tomlinson A, Bron AJ, Korb DR, Amano S, Paugh JR, Pearce EI, 
et al. The international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: 
Report of the diagnosis subcommittee. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 
2011;52:2006‑49.
16. Schaumberg DA, Nichols JJ, Papas EB, Tong L, Uchino M, 
Nichols KK. The international workshop on meibomian gland 
dysfunction: Report of the subcommittee on the epidemiology of, 
and associated risk factors for, MGD. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 
2011;52:1994‑2005.
17. Geerling G, Baudouin C, Aragona P, Rolando M, Boboridis KG, 
Benítez‑Del‑Castillo JM, et al. Emerging strategies for the diagnosis 
and treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction: Proceedings of the 
OCEAN group meeting. Ocul Surf 2017;15:179‑92.
18. Powell DR, Nichols JJ, Nichols KK. Inter‑examiner reliability in 
meibomian gland dysfunction assessment. Invest Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci 2012;53:3120‑5.
19. Dougherty JM, Osgood JK, McCulley JP. The role of wax and sterol 
ester fatty acids in chronic blepharitis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 
1991;32:1932–7.
20. Ong BL, Larke JR. Meibomian gland dysfunction: Some clinical, 
biochemical and physical observations. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 
1990;10:144–8.
21. Lee JM, Jeon YJ, Kim KY, Hwang KY, Kwon YA, Koh K. Ocular 
surface analysis: A comparison between the LipiView® II and 
IDRA®. Eur J Ophthalmol 2021;31:2300‑6.
22. Arita R, Fukuoka S, Kawashima M. Proposed algorithm for 
management of meibomian gland dysfunction based on 
noninvasive meibography. J Clin Med 2021;10:65.
23. Xiao J, Adil MY, Chen X, Utheim ØA, Ræder S, Tønseth KA, et al. 
Functional and morphological evaluation of meibomian glands 
in the assessment of meibomian gland dysfunction subtype and 
severity. Am J Ophthalmol 2020;209:160‑7.
24. DanielE, MaguireMG, PistilliM, BunyaVY, Massaro‑GiordanoGM, 
Smith E, et al. Grading and baseline characteristics of meibomian 
glands in meibography images and their clinical associations in 
the Dry Eye Assessment and Management (DREAM) study. Ocul 
Surf 2019;17:491‑501.
25. Singh S, Naidu GC, Vemuganti G, Basu S. Morphological variants 
of meibomian glands: Correlation of meibography features with 
histopathology findings. Br J Ophthalmol 2023;107:195‑200.
26. Hong J, Sun X, Wei A, Cui X, Li Y, Qian T, et al. Assessment of tear 
film stability in dry eye with a newly developed keratograph. 
1356 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
Cornea 2013;32:716‑21.
27. Fuller DG, Potts K, Kim J. Noninvasive tear breakup times and 
ocular surface disease. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90:1086‑91.
28. Cho P, Douthwaite W. The relation between invasive and 
noninvasive tear break‑up time. Optom Vis Sci 1995;72:17‑22.
29. Zhao S, Le Q. Analysis of the first tear film break‑up point in 
Sjögren’s syndrome and non‑Sjögren’s syndrome dry eye patients. 
BMC Ophthalmol 2022;22:1.
30. Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Gouveia SM, Yokoi N, Voon LW. Functional 
aspects of the tear film lipid layer. Exp Eye Res 2004;78:347–60.
31. King‑Smith PE, Fink BA, Nichols JJ, Nichols KK, Braun RJ, 
McFadden GB. The contribution of lipid layer movement to 
tear film thinning and breakup. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 
2009;50:2747–56.
32. Goto E, Tseng SC. Differentiation of lipid tear deficiency dry eye 
by kinetic analysis of tear interference images. Arch Ophthalmol 
2003;121:173–80.
33. Goto E, Tseng SC. Kinetic analysis of tear interference images in 
aqueous tear deficiency dry eye before and after punctal occlusion. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:1897–905.
34. Tsubota K. Tear dynamics and dry eye. Prog Retin Eye Res 
1998;17:565–96.
35. Ousler GW 3rd, Hagberg KW, Schindelar M, Welch D, Abelson MB. 
The ocular protection index. Cornea 2008;27:509‑13.
36. Roy NS, Wei Y, Kuklinski E, Asbell PA. The growing need for 
validated biomarkers and endpoints for dry eye clinical research. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2017;58:BIO1‑9.
37. Matsumoto Y, Sato EA, Ibrahim OM, Dogru M, Tsubota K. The 
application of in vivo laser confocal microscopy to the diagnosis 
and evaluation of meibomian gland dysfunction. Mol Vis 
2008;14:1263‑71.
38. Fu J, Chou Y, Hao R, Jiang X, Liu Y, Li X. Evaluation of ocular 
surface impairment in meibomian gland dysfunction of varying 
severity using a comprehensive grading scale. Medicine (Baltimore) 
2019;98:e16547.
39. Randon M, Liang H, El Hamdaoui M, Tahiri R, Batellier L, 
Denoyer A, et al. In vivo confocal microscopy as a novel and 
reliable tool for the diagnosis of Demodex eyelid infestation. Br J 
Ophthalmol 2015;99:336‑41.
40. Singh S, Shanbhag SS, Basu S. Palpebral lobe of the human lacrimal 
gland: Morphometric analysis in normal versus dry eyes. Br J 
Ophthalmol 2021;105:1352‑7.
41. Singh S, Shanbhag SS, Basu S. Tear secretion from the lacrimal 
gland: Variations in normal versus dry eyes. Br J Ophthalmol 
2022;106:772‑6.
42. Singh S, Srivastav S, Modiwala Z, Ali MH, Basu S. Repeatability, 
reproducibility and agreement between three different diagnostic 
imaging platforms for tear film evaluation of normal and dry eye 
disease. Eye (Lond) 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41433‑022‑02281‑2.
43. QiuX, Gong L, LuY, Jin H, Robitaille M. The diagnostic significance 
of Fourier‑domain optical coherence tomography in Sjögren 
syndrome, aqueous tear deficiency and lipid tear deficiency 
patients. Acta Ophthalmol 2012;90:e359‑66.
44. Singh A, Vanathi M, Kishore A, Gupta N, Tandon R. Evaluation 
of strip meniscometry, tear meniscus height and depth in the 
diagnosis of dry eye disease in asian Indian eyes. Ocul Surf 
2019;17:747‑52.
45. Arita R, Itoh K, Inoue K, Amano S. Noncontact infrared 
meibography to document age‑related changes of the meibomian 
glands in a normal population. Ophthalmology 2008;115:911–5.
46. Srinivasan S, Menzies K, Sorbara L, Jones L. Infrared imaging of 
meibomian gland structure using a novel keratograph. Opt Vision 
Sci 2012;89:788–94.
47. Qiao J, Yan X. Emerging treatment options for meibomian gland 
dysfunction. Clin Ophthalmol (Auckland, NZ) 2013;7:1797‑803.
48. Olson MC, Korb DR, Greiner JV. Increase in tear film lipid layer 
thickness following treatment with warm compresses in patients 
with meibomian gland dysfunction. Eye Contact Lens 2003;29:96–9.
49. Li S, Yang K, Wang J, Li S, Zhu L, Feng J, et al. Effect of a 
novel thermostatic device on meibomian gland dysfunction: 
A randomized controlled trial in chinese patients. Ophthalmol 
Ther 2022;11:261‑70.
50. Goldberg DJ. Current trends in intense pulsed light. J Clin Aesthet 
Dermatol 2012;5:45‑53.
51. D’Souza S, Padmanabhan Nair A, Iyappan G, Dickman MM, 
Thakur P, Mullick R, et al. Clinical and molecular outcomes after 
combined intense pulsed light therapy with low‑level light therapy 
in recalcitrant evaporative dry eye disease with meibomian gland 
dysfunction. Cornea 2022;41:1080‑7.
52. Bäumler W, Vural E, Landthaler M, Muzzi F, Shafirstein G. The 
effects of intense pulsed light (IPL) on blood vessels investigated 
by mathematical modeling. Lasers Surg Med 2007;39:132‑9.
53. Lane SS, DuBiner HB, Epstein RJ, Ernest PH, Greiner JV, 
Hardten DR, et al. A new system, the LipiFlow, for the treatment 
of meibomian gland dysfunction. Cornea 2012;31:396–404.
54. Greiner JV. A single LipiFlow® Thermal Pulsation System 
treatment improves meibomian gland function and reduces dry 
eye symptoms for 9 months. Curr Eye Res 2012;37:272–8.
55. Friedland BR, Fleming CP, Blackie CA, Korb DR. A novel 
thermodynamic treatment for meibomian gland dysfunction. Curr 
Eye Res 2011;36:79–87.
56. MaskinSL. Intraductal meibomian gland probing relieves symptoms 
of obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction. Cornea 2010;29:1145–52.
57. Wladis EJ. Intraductal meibomian gland probing in the 
management of ocular rosacea. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 
2012;28:416–8.
58. Ianaro A, Ialenti A, Maffia P, Sautebin L, Rombolà L, Carnuccio R, 
et al. Anti‑inflammatory activity of macrolide antibiotics. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2000;292:156‑63.
59. Dougherty JM, McCulley JP, Silvany RE, Meyer DR. The role of 
tetracycline in chronic blepharitis. Inhibition of lipase production 
in staphylococci. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1991;32:2970–5.
60. Suzuki T. Inflamed obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction 
causes ocular surface inflammation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 
2018;59:DES94‑101.
61. Foulks GN, Borchman D, Yappert M, Kim SH, McKay JW. Topical 
azithromycin therapy for meibomian gland dysfunction: Clinical 
response and lipid alterations. Cornea 2010;29:781–8.
62. Friedlaender MH, Protzko E. Clinical development of 1% 
azithromycin in DuraSite, a topical azalide anti‑infective for ocular 
surface therapy. Clin Ophthalmol 2007;1:3–10.
63. Aghai ZH, Kode A, Saslow JG, Nakhla T, Farhath S, Stahl GE, et al. 
Azithromycin suppresses activation of nuclear factor‑kappa B and 
synthesis of pro‑inflammatory cytokines in tracheal aspirate cells 
from premature infants. Pediatr Res 2007;62:483–8.
64. Macsai MS. The role of omega‑3 dietary supplementation in 
blepharitis and meibomian gland dysfunction (an AOS thesis). 
Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 2008;106:336–56.
65. Calder PC. Polyunsaturated fatty acids, inflammation, and 
immunity. Lipids 2001;36:1007–24.
66. Dry Eye Assessment and Management Study Research Group; 
Asbell PA, Maguire MG, Pistilli M, Ying GS, Szczotka‑Flynn LB, 
et al. n‑3 fatty acid supplementation for the treatment of dry eye 
disease. N Engl J Med 2018;378:1681‑90.
67. Jackson WB. Blepharitis: Current strategies for diagnosis and 
management. Can J Ophthalmol 2008;43:170–9.
68. Rosenthal P, Borsook D. Ocular neuropathic pain. Br J Ophthalmol 
2016;100:128‑34.
69. Downie LE, Craig JP. Tear film evaluation and management in 
soft contact lens wear: A systematic approach. Clin Exp Optom 
2017;100:438‑58.
