Vol.: (0123456789)
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10792-024-02978-1
REVIEW
New advances in medical management of dry eye: 
optimizing treatment strategies for enhanced relief
Toktam Shahraki · Alireza Baradaran‑Rafii · 
Ramesh Ayyala · Amir Arabi · John Jarstad · 
Fatemeh Memar
Received: 13 May 2023 / Accepted: 29 October 2023 / Published online: 9 February 2024
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2024
Abstract
Purpose Dry eye disease (DED) is a prevalent ocu￾lar surface disease that is conventionally character￾ized by tear film hyperosmolarity and instability. This 
review presents a summarized classification of DED, 
followed by a comprehensive discussion of the most 
recent topical and systemic medications and clinical 
recommendations for selecting the most appropriate 
option for each patient.
Methods An extensive literature search was con￾ducted on electronic databases, such as PubMed, Sco￾pus, and Web of Science, using keywords including 
“dry eye syndrome,” “ocular surface disease,” “medi￾cal management,” “artificial tears,” “topical immu￾nomodulators,” and “meibomian gland dysfunction.”
Results The underlying reasons for DED can range 
from insufficient aqueous tear production to increased 
tear evaporation. Recent literature has provided a 
more in-depth understanding of the pathophysiology 
of DED by examining the tear film’s lipid, aqueous, 
and mucin layers. However, despite these advance￾ments, medical management of patients with symp￾tomatic DED has not fully reflected this modernized 
knowledge of its pathophysiology.
Conclusion To develop a rationalized strategy for 
treating DED, it is crucial to have updated knowledge 
of therapeutic options, their mechanisms of actions, 
and indications based on the DED type and underly￾ing causes.
Keywords Artificial tears · Dry eye disease · 
Evaporative dry eye · Medical management · Mucin 
secretagogue · Topical immunomodulators
Introduction
Dry eye disease (DED) is a commonly encountered 
ocular condition, with a prevalence rate of up to 50% 
in specific populations [1]. It is linked with a sub￾stantial population burden, resulting in compromised 
vision-related quality of life that surpasses any other 
vision-threatening eye disease [2]. Furthermore, 
DED imposes a substantial burden on mental health￾related quality of life, which is particularly noticeable 
in cases of undiagnosed and severe DED [3]. As per 
a recent survey conducted in the United Kingdom 
(UK), untreated DED has been linked with a signifi￾cant negative impact on work productivity and visual 
activities [4]. From an economic standpoint, the esti￾mated cost of managing DED in the United States 
T. Shahraki (*) · A. Arabi 
Ophthalmic Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University 
of Medical Sciences, No. 23, Paidarfard St., Boostan 9 St., 
Pasdaran Ave, Tehran, Iran
e-mail: Toktam1372@gmail.com
A. Baradaran-Rafii · R. Ayyala · J. Jarstad 
Department of Ophthalmology, University of South 
Florida, Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA
F. Memar 
Nova Southeastern University, Clearwater, FL, USA
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 2 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
(US) was reported to be 3.8 billion USD, with a soci￾etal cost of over 55 billion USD [5]. The per capita 
cost associated with DED management ranges from 
265 to over 1100 USD in European countries and 
China [6, 7]. Indirect costs constitute the largest pro￾portion of the overall cost attributed to DED [8].
The reduction of the visual, mental, and economic 
burden of DED on both patients and society can be 
achieved through accurate diagnosis and effective 
medical and surgical treatment. This article aims 
to provide a comprehensive review of the medical 
treatment of DED with a focus on recent updates 
concerning topical and oral medications. Conserva￾tive therapy is the first line of management for DED, 
and surgical interventions are generally reserved for 
severe and refractory cases. As such, updated knowl￾edge of medical treatment is essential for improving 
the quality of ophthalmology practice for the majority 
of DED patients.
Pathophysiology
The lacrimal functional unit (LFU) is a comprehen￾sive, unified system that comprises the ocular surface, 
lacrimal glands, meibomian glands, ocular surface 
nervous system, and the eyelids [9]. The primary out￾put of the LFU is the tear film [10]. Its lipid layer, 
which constitutes the outermost layer, is generated 
by the meibomian glands, whereas the intermediate 
aqueous sheet and the innermost mucin layer are pro￾duced by the lacrimal gland and conjunctival goblet 
cells, respectively [11]. All layers are integrated to 
give the tear film certain properties for lubrication, 
nutrition, protection, repair and transparency of the 
ocular surface [12].
Tear film instability, which is a characteristic fea￾ture of DED, arises from alterations in the quantity 
or quality of the aqueous, mucin, and lipid layers of 
the tear film [13]. Upon establishment, tear film insta￾bility is primarily characterized by the hyperosmolar￾ity of tears, leading to the induction of inflammatory 
mediators such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor 
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and resulting in damage to 
the ocular surface [14]. In cases of DED, the osmo￾larity of the tear film is elevated to approximately 360 
mOsm/L, as opposed to the typical levels of around 
300 mOsm/L [12]. Hyperosmolar environment of the 
ocular surface has also a direct apoptotic effect on 
the epithelial cells, which is mediated by mitogen￾activated protein kinases (MAPKs), chemokines, and 
different proteinases [15]. Accordingly, the vicious 
cycle of DED involves a series of interrelated events. 
It begins with tear hyperosmolarity, leading to ocu￾lar surface inflammation, impairment of the epithelial 
layer, exacerbation of tear film instability, and even￾tually further elevation of tear film hyperosmolarity 
[10, 14].
Classification of DED
Drawing on the key role of tear film hyperosmolar￾ity in DED, the condition can be categorized based 
on the underlying cause of hyperosmolarity, namely 
"aqueous deficient type," characterized by reduced 
tear secretion, and "evaporative type," marked by 
increased tear evaporation [10, 16]. These factors 
may intersect and both play a role in the pathophysi￾ology of DED. Recent evidence suggests that evapo￾rative tear film instability occurs more frequently than 
a combined mechanism [11], and aqueous deficient 
DED alone is the least common type [17].
Aqueous deficient DED
In this particular DED type, the rate of tear film 
evaporation is normal, but there is a reduction in the 
secretion of tear from the lacrimal glands. Hypose￾cretion of the lacrimal glands can occur in various 
conditions. Intrinsic non-immune dysfunction of the 
lacrimal glands commonly occurs in older females 
due to decreased androgenic hormone levels, which 
contribute to lower tear production [18]. Systemic 
medications, such as beta blockers, antidepressants, 
anti-anxiety agents, antihistamines, diuretics, and 
decongestants, are also linked to decreased secre￾tion [19]. Immune dysfunction of the lacrimal glands 
is characterized by the infiltration of immune cells 
and subsequent destruction of secretory units. This 
pathophysiology is observed in various conditions, 
including Sjogren’s syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA), autoimmune thyroid disease, and hematopoi￾etic stem cell transplantations complicated by chronic 
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) [11, 20]. Aqueous 
deficient DED of the severe cicatrizing conjunctivi￾tis type is characterized by obstruction and scarring 
of the lacrimal duct, which impedes the delivery of 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 Page 3 of 24 49
Vol.: (0123456789)
produced tear to the ocular surface. Several diseases 
such as Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS), severe 
atopic conditions, ocular mucous membrane pem￾phigoid (MMP), and trachoma are the main causes 
of this type of DED [21]. The normal functioning of 
corneal nerves is essential for the production of tears 
from lacrimal glands. They are also involved in main￾taining the homeostasis of the epithelial layer and 
immune regulation of the ocular surface [22]. Her￾petic keratitis, systemic neuropathies (such as diabe￾tes mellitus), and certain types of ocular surgery (e.g., 
laser-assisted in  situ keratomileusis [LASIK]) can 
cause damage to these nerves. Such damage is associ￾ated with chronic hyposecretive DED [10, 20].
Evaporative DED
This type of dry eye disease is characterized by nor￾mal lacrimal secretion, but excessive evaporation of 
tears, leading to a reduction in water content and an 
increase in tear film osmolarity. The primary under￾lying cause of this type of dry eye is insufficient or 
abnormal production of lipids [16]. Meibomian gland 
dysfunction (MGD) or blepharitis leads to qualita￾tive and quantitative alterations in the lipid layer of 
the tear film, resulting in excessive evaporation and 
subsequent hyperosmolarity of the tear film [23]. 
Lagophthalmos, incomplete blinking and exophthal￾mos can lead to increased tear film evaporation and 
ocular surface exposure, resulting in evaporative dry 
eye. In addition, decreased blinking rate (less than 
5 blinks/second) seen in conditions like Parkinson’s 
disease or Bell’s palsy is also associated with this 
type of dry eye [24]. Prolonged use of digital screens, 
or visual display terminals (VDTs), is a growing eti￾ology for evaporative DED due to decreased rate of 
blinking [25]. Besides modern work requirements, an 
increase in screen time has been observed after recent 
viral pandemics, which has been reported to increase 
the incidence of evaporative dry eye and ocular asthe￾nopia [26].
The Asia Dry Eye Society (ADES) has proposed a 
new classification that distinguishes mucin deficiency 
from evaporative dry eye, which they call "decreased 
wettability dry eye." This differs from the previous 
classification suggested by the Tear Film and Ocular 
Surface Dry Eye Workshop (TFOS DEWS) II report, 
which includes mucin layer abnormality as a cause of 
evaporative dry eye [27]. The underlying mechanism 
of decreased wettability DED involves the shortage of 
membrane-associated mucin or mucins synthesized 
by conjunctival goblet cells, which disrupts the cor￾neal surface’s ability to remain wet. This deficit in 
the effective mucin layer results in the amplification 
of tear evaporation and an increase in tear hyperos￾molarity [28]. Mucin deficiency DED is commonly 
associated with conditions such as contact lens use, 
chronic allergic conditions, benzalkonium chloride 
(BAK) toxicity, and vitamin A deficiency [28]. Use of 
both rigid gas permeable and soft contact lenses are 
shown to reduce goblet cell density and mucin pro￾duction over 6 months [29, 30]. Exposure to BAK, 
especially in patients receiving long-term antiglau￾coma agents, is associated with tear film instabil￾ity, loss of goblet cells, and evaporative DED [31]. 
Whether through BAK or the active ingredient of the 
drops, mucin deficiency and goblet cell loss seem to 
have the pivotal roles in glaucoma-associated ocular 
surface disease [32].
Diagnosis of DED
The symptomatology of DED is not sufficient to dif￾ferentiate it from other possible diagnoses or to iden￾tify the type of DED. Therefore, a comprehensive 
patient history and standard ophthalmic examina￾tions are the primary approaches for diagnosing and 
classifying DED. A comprehensive assessment of 
the patient’s history should include a review of any 
ocular surgeries, recent or prolonged use of topical 
medications, contact lens usage, atopy or allergic 
conjunctivitis, and systemic diseases or medications. 
Additionally, any occupational or environmental fac￾tors that may predispose the patient to DED, such as 
prolonged desk work or dry and hot weather, should 
be taken into account.
Aberrant patterns of blinking can provide impor￾tant insights into the diagnosis of DED. A reduced 
blink rate is associated with an increased risk of 
evaporative DED, whereas an increased blink rate 
can be an indicator of ocular surface dryness in 
cases where reduced blink rate is not the primary 
cause of DED [33]. The measurement of tear menis￾cus height can be a useful diagnostic tool for DED, 
especially when other clinical tests are not available 
or feasible. The measurement of tear meniscus height 
can be obtained using Keratograph 5M or optical 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 4 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
coherence tomography (OCT) [34]. A recent report 
has approved the efficacy of the new strip meniscom￾etry (SM) in the diagnosis of dry eyes [35]
.
Lid-parallel conjunctival folds (LIPCOFs) are 
another sign used by 70% of European ophthalmolo￾gists to diagnose DED [36, 37]. Quick and nonin￾vasive nature, good positive predictive value, and 
moderate sensitivity and specificity are advantages of 
LIPCOFs as a DED screening tool [38]
.
When DED symptoms are present, corneal stain￾ing in inferior zones is the most frequent type of 
staining and correlates with more severe grades of 
DED [39]. When assessing corneal staining in diag￾nosing DED and evaluating its severity, a combina￾tion of fluorescein and lissamine green dyes is often 
preferred. This complementary technique enables flu￾orescein to reveal de-epithelialized sites with clearer 
corneal staining, while lissamine green detects earlier 
epithelial cell damage on both the cornea and con￾junctiva [40].
With or without anesthesia, amount of Schirmer 
paper’s wetting (less than 10 mm over 5 min) is 
another frequent method for evaluating tear secre￾tion [41]. In recent years, there has been progress in 
interpreting the Schirmer test results. Weighted calcu￾lation of paper wetting during the final 4 min, while 
decreasing the relative importance of the first minute 
wetting, may improve the test’s sensitivity without 
requiring anesthesia [42].
Tear breakup time (TBUT) is often utilized to con￾firm tear film instability in cases where it is less than 
10 s. TBUT incorporates both the aqueous and lipid 
components of the tear film, rendering it a reliable 
diagnostic test for DED, albeit lacking the ability to 
distinguish between aqueous deficient and evapora￾tive types. [43] In a recent investigation, a threshold 
value of 5.3 to 6.0 s was identified as having excellent 
accuracy in discriminating between normal eyes and 
those with DED [44].
In order to address the limitations of conven￾tional clinical tests, several ancillary tests have been 
proposed for diagnosing DED. Tear film osmolar￾ity measurement can confirm tear hyperosmolarity. 
While it has been validated as a laboratory test for 
diagnosing dry eye, the interpretation of the result 
may be challenging due to inconsistent correlation 
with clinical signs or symptoms [45]. Matrix metal￾loproteinase-9 (MMP-9) levels are claimed to have 
the ability to diagnose DED, grade its severity and 
monitor the treatment response, although it fails to 
differentiate DED from other inflammatory con￾ditions [46]. Recent studies have indicated that a 
decrease in lactoferrin levels within the tear film is 
indicative of reduced lacrimal gland function [47]. 
The TearScience Inc.’s LipiView interferometer, 
based on the analysis of the interferometric pattern of 
the patient’s tears, can effectively assess the thickness 
of the tear film lipid layer [48].
Conservative non‑medical treatments of DED
The therapeutic approach to DED involves a sequen￾tial process, beginning with conservative non-phar￾macological measures such as lifestyle adjustments, 
environmental modifications, and occupational inter￾ventions. Existing literature primarily emphasizes 
conservative therapy for general ocular surface symp￾toms, regardless of the DED subtype. Such interven￾tions are typically reserved for DED prevention or the 
management of mild symptoms. Nonetheless, they 
should not be disregarded as complementary therapy 
to pharmacological treatments in the more advanced 
stages of DED.
Weight loss, decreased calorie intake, and restric￾tion of sedentary behaviors have been recommended 
to improve DED symptoms [49]. Adopting a Medi￾terranean diet (e.g., low intake of dairy and meat and 
high intake of fish, nuts, and olive oil), in addition to 
increasing physical activity, has been recently sug￾gested to control DED symptoms in general [50]. 
Increased dietary intake of fruits and vegetables rich 
in quercetin and other anti-oxidant molecules has also 
been associated with promising results in improving 
tear film function [51].
Air moisturizing in warm climate and low humid￾ity environments may have beneficial effects on the 
tear film [52]. In a clinical trial on 30 patients, mois￾ture chamber spectacles were a safe and effective 
treatment for DED, especially for patients who live 
in environment with low humidity [53]. In another 
study, temporary use of the warming moist cham￾ber goggles was successful in relieving MGD- and 
VDT-associated DED symptoms in short-term [54]. 
According to reports, the use of moist cool air devices 
has also demonstrated symptomatic improvement in 
office workers with DED [55]. Generally, air mois￾turizing devices, chambers, and goggles may serve 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 Page 5 of 24 49
Vol.: (0123456789)
as a promising alternative therapy for mild DED in 
patients residing in unfavorable environmental and 
climatic conditions. Moreover, to mitigate tear film 
evaporation, it is commonly advised to avoid expo￾sure to cold winds during winter and direct airflow 
from air conditioning units during summer.
Occupational risk factors associated with pro￾longed use of VDTs and computer vision have been 
addressed by implementing ergonomic modifications 
such as adjustable chairs and frequent breaks, as well 
as utilizing blinking animation programs [56]. These 
modifications aim to mitigate the risk factors associ￾ated with evaporative DED by increasing blink rate 
and reducing screen time.
Main determinants of medical management 
strategies for DED
Accurate determination of DED type and grading of 
DED severity are essential prerequisites to initiating 
appropriate treatment with the correct use of avail￾able products. Knowledge of the specific DED type 
will enable the adoption of a tear film-oriented strat￾egy, wherein the most affected layer, whether aque￾ous, mucin, or lipid, is targeted for treatment of DED. 
Assessing the severity of DED is an additional strat￾egy, given that severe cases may require a multidrug 
approach to prevent complications that could threaten 
vision.
Determination of DED type; tear film-oriented 
strategy
The presence of superficial punctate keratopathy, 
reduced strip meniscometry (less than 4 mm in 5 
s), abnormal Schirmer strip test without anesthe￾sia (less than 5 mm in 5 min), and reduced LIP￾COF indicate the likelihood of aqueous deficient 
DED [27, 35, 57]. According to the compensatory 
theory, aqueous deficiency in DED may be linked 
to increased mucus production from goblet cells 
and a thicker lipid layer due to MGD [58]. These 
changes may contribute to the development of fila￾mentary keratopathy. Additionally, the decreased 
fluid volume in these patients may result in delayed 
tear film clearance, leading to mucus accumulation 
and a thicker lipid layer [27]. Observation of the 
tear breakup pattern reveals the appearance of line 
breaks on the inferior cornea upon redistribution 
of fluorescein-stained tears following eye opening 
[59]. The replacement of the aqueous component of 
the tear film is crucial in the treatment of aqueous 
deficient DED. This can be accomplished through 
the use of artificial tears (AT) and aqueous secreta￾gogues. In cases where inflammation is the central 
mechanism of DED-related damage, anti-inflamma￾tory agents should be considered to control inflam￾mation when necessary.
Pathological observations of meibomian gland 
orifices or the eyelid margin are indicative of evapo￾rative DED. Thinning of the lipid layer, as observed 
through lipid layer interferometry, suggests lipid 
deficiency and the presence of evaporative DED 
[12, 48]. In cases of pure lipid deficiency DED, 
the presence of normal mucin leads to the appear￾ance of random breaks in the tear breakup pattern 
[27]. In cases where pure lipid deficiency DED is 
present, treatment should primarily target the lipid 
layer. This involves addressing MGD to improve the 
quality and quantity of meibum, which facilitates 
lipid layer replacement. ATs can be used to replace 
evaporated tears, and lipid-containing tear substi￾tutes and ophthalmic ointments can be utilized to 
temporarily enhance the diminished lipid layer [60].
Proposed characteristics of decreased wettabil￾ity DED include a short TBUT of nearly 0 s, along 
with the presence of spot or dimple breaks in the 
tear breakup pattern immediately following eye 
opening [59]. The lack of an appropriate response 
to typical DED medications and the absence of 
corneal staining during examination are additional 
features indicative of mucin deficiency DED [27]. 
Tear substitutes that contain mucomimetic material 
may be particularly beneficial in the treatment of 
patients with mucin deficiency DED. Additionally, 
newer mucin secretagogues may also be a promis￾ing option for managing this type of DED [28]. In 
addition, as an alternative approach, mucin-like 
agents such as lubricin can be utilized to replace 
lost mucins on the ocular surface [61].
Grading DED severity; severity-based strategy
The grading process of DED typically commences 
with an assessment of the patient’s reported symp￾toms (Table  1). DED questionnaires and patient￾reported outcomes (PROs) are well-known tools for 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 6 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
evaluation and grading of symptoms [62]. Accord￾ing to a review in 2020, 24 DED questionnaires have 
been suggested in ophthalmic literature, among them 
the Ocular Surface Disease Index (OSDI), impact 
of dry eye in everyday life (IDEEL), dry eye-related 
quality-of-life score (DEQS), National Eye Institute 
Visual Function Questionnaire-25 (NEI-VFQ25), and 
University of North Carolina Dry Eye Management 
Scale (UNC DEMS) are more recommended based 
on their attention to quality of life parameters [63]. 
Dry eye questionnaires have been developed for vari￾ous purposes and in different languages, emphasizing 
the importance for clinicians to carefully select the 
appropriate questionnaire based on the specific clini￾cal situation of the patient.
Various DED severity classification systems also 
incorporate clinical tests such as corneal staining, 
TBUT, Schirmer test, and the presence and severity 
of MGD as important factors to determine the sever￾ity of DED. Combining symptom evaluation and 
clinical tests, various DED severity classification sys￾tems have been suggested in the literature, including 
the triple classification of dry eye for practical clini￾cal use [64], the Dysfunctional Tear Syndrome Study 
Group [65], TFOS DEWS I Report [66], the ODIS￾SEY European Consensus [67], the Italian Dacryol￾ogy and Ocular Surface Society Classification [68], 
and the Mexican Dry Eye Disease Expert Panel [69].
Despite the variations in DED severity classifi￾cation systems, some general rules can be identi￾fied regarding the role of DED severity in medical 
treatment strategies. Patients with mild disease can be 
managed using lubricant eye drops that are currently 
available. Preserved ATs may be an acceptable option 
for lower frequency treatments; however, if treatment 
is scheduled for long-term use, preservative-free (PF) 
ATs are preferred [11]. Modification of lifestyle is 
also advised, including smoking cessation, reduction 
of screen time, identification of exacerbating factors 
such as systemic medications, and humidification of 
ambient air [71, 72]. In all grades of DED, special 
attention should be given to concomitant conditions, 
particularly MGD and blepharitis.
In moderate DED cases, most classification sys￾tems recommend the addition of topical anti-inflam￾matory agents to the previously mentioned treatment 
options. A variety of anti-inflammatory agents can be 
utilized, ranging from corticosteroids to cyclosporine 
A (CsA) and lifitegrast [73, 74]. Adjunctive therapy 
with fatty acid supplement (omega-3) is also consid￾ered in moderate DED [75]. Due to the need for more 
aggressive lubricating therapy, PF drops are preferred 
over preserved AT in this stage of DED treatment 
[11]. Moderate to severe DED patients are often pre￾scribed topical secretagogue agents to stimulate the 
secretion of mucin [76].
In severe cases of DED, oral cholinergic agonists, 
autologous serum drops, and platelet-rich plasma 
(PRP) are frequently recommended [77]. The pres￾ence of filamentary keratitis should be noted in this 
stage as it requires specific therapeutic interven￾tions. Topical corticosteroids may be required for a 
Table 1 Representative symptoms and signs of mild, moderate and severe DED according to different classification systems. Abbre￾viation: DED, dry eye disease; TBUT, tear break-up time
Severity of DED Symptoms (dryness, foreign body 
sensation, redness, ocular burning)
Signs (conjunctival staining, corneal staining, reduced TBUT, 
reduced Schirmer test, reduced tear meniscus, conjunctival scar￾ring, eyelid margin alteration)
Permanent 
vision loss
Mild Episodic/intermittent[66, 68, 70] No corneal damage[65, 67]
No/mild tear signs[66, 67]
Mild to moderate conjunctival staining[65, 66]
No
Moderate Frequent[66] Peripheral/reversible corneal damage[65, 67]
Moderate tear signs[66, 67]
Severe conjunctival staining without scarring
No eyelid margin alteration
No
Severe Frequent[68, 70] Central/irreversible corneal damage[65]
Filamentary keratitis[65]
Severe reduced tear signs[66]
Conjunctival scarring[65–68]
Altered eyelid margins[66]
Yes[70]
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 Page 7 of 24 49
Vol.: (0123456789)
prolonged period in severe DED. Occasionally, sys￾temic anti-inflammatory medications may be used to 
control DED and concomitant systemic immune con￾dition [78].
Medical treatment of DED; an update on options
The primary components of medical management 
for DED include tear substitution, anti-inflammatory 
therapy, mucin substitution through the use of mucin 
secretagogues, and treatment of MGD (Table 2).
Tear substitution
Tear substitution is an established therapeutic strategy 
for managing DED symptoms. ATs are commonly 
used to replace and supplement the inadequate natu￾ral tear film. However, recent advances in tear substi￾tution therapy have led to the development of novel 
formulations such as liposomal sprays. Furthermore, 
biological tear substitutes, such as autologous serum 
eye drops, have emerged as a promising therapeutic 
option for severe and refractory cases of DED.
Artificial tears
The primary medical management approach for DED 
involves the use of AT drops, gel-type drops, gels, 
and ointments. These interventions are considered 
first-line therapy [79]. ATs are widely used in the 
management of all stages and types of DED. These 
products typically contain a combination of key 
ingredients, including demulcents, electrolytes, emol￾lients (oily agents), and preservatives. The primary 
objective of ATs is to lubricate the ocular surface and 
augment the volume of the aqueous tear film through 
the use of water-soluble polymers known as demul￾cent agents. In addition to their lubricating properties, 
ATs are known to decrease tear film hyperosmolarity 
and dilute the concentration of inflammatory media￾tors, which can help to alleviate the inflammatory 
process associated with DED [13].
When prescribing ATs for patients with DED, cli￾nicians must take several factors into consideration to 
ensure optimal treatment outcomes. When ATs are 
required more than four times a day, PF ATs are gen￾erally recommended to avoid potential toxicity asso￾ciated with the prolonged use of preservatives [12]. 
Single-dose preparations of ATs are available that 
do not contain BAK or other preservatives. A recent 
meta-analysis of four studies evaluated the efficacy of 
preserved and PF ATs in reducing signs and symp￾toms of DED. The analysis did not identify a sig￾nificant difference in efficacy between the two types 
of ATs [80]. Accordingly, the primary advantage of 
PF ATs over preserved formulations is their superior 
safety profile and lower incidence of adverse effect.
The main methods for increasing the viscosity of 
ATs involve increasing the concentration of demul￾cent agents, using multiple demulcents in the for￾mulation, or incorporating high-molecular-weight 
demulcents. By enhancing the viscosity of the tear 
film, these techniques can improve the lubricating 
properties of ATs and prolong their retention time on 
the ocular surface [81]. For patients with moderate to 
severe DED, higher viscosity formulations are often 
Table 2 Available medical 
treatments of DED based on 
pathophysiologic aspects
Pathophysiology-based treatment of DED
Tear substitution Anti-inflammatory treatment Mucin substitution
Artificial tears Corticosteroids Diquafosol tetrasodium
Liposomal sprays Cyclosporine A Rebamipide
Intranasal sprays Tacrolimus Vitamin A
Autologous serum Lifitegrast Lubricin
Platelet-rich plasma Non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs
Plasma rich in growth factor Essential fatty acids
Umbilical cord blood serum
Human serum albumin
Nerve growth factor
Amniotic membrane extract
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 8 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
preferred [82]. Mid-viscosity gel-type tears provide 
the advantages of increased viscosity while being eas￾ier to apply compared to gels and ointments. This is 
particularly beneficial for nighttime use when appli￾cation may be more difficult. In clinical practice, gel￾type ATs have been found to provide greater improve￾ments in both signs and symptoms of DED compared 
to standard low-viscosity drops [83].
Hyaluronic acid (HA) and its sodium salt deriva￾tive can serve multiple purposes in treating DED, 
including increasing water retention on the ocular 
surface, reducing inflammation, controlling exces￾sive evaporation, enhancing meibomian gland func￾tion, and improving the homeostasis of epithelial and 
goblet cells [84]. Based on its multifunctional proper￾ties, ATs containing HA may be the preferred choice 
for clinicians treating severe and mixed-type DED. A 
meta-analysis of 19 studies found that HA eye drops 
were more effective than non-HA ATs in improving 
both the signs and symptoms of DED [85]. The utili￾zation of high molecular weight HA (HMW-HA) has 
demonstrated additional benefits in both in vivo and 
in vitro studies. Studies have shown that compared to 
low molecular weight (LMW-HA), HMW-HA may 
result in greater improvements in DED signs and pro￾vide better protection of epithelial cells [86].
To compensate for the lipid layer deficiency in 
DED, some ATs are formulated with emollients or 
surfactants, such as flaxseed oil, castor oil, dimyris￾toyl-phosphatidylglycerol, and cetalkonium chloride 
(CKC), which are claimed to increase the thick￾ness of the tear film lipid layer and improve patient 
comfort [87]. These types of ATs may be preferred 
for evaporative DED and MGD patients. Similar to 
the lipid layer, specialized ATs are available that 
can restore the mucin layer through the inclusion 
of carbomers and hydroxypropyl-guar (HP-guar) 
[28]. These agents possess a branched molecular 
structure, which enables them to imitate mucin-1, 
the natural product of goblet cells, and provide ocu￾lar surface protection through their mucoadhesive 
function [88].
Some ATs contain osmoprotectants, which are 
agents aimed at protecting epithelial cells from 
damage caused by tear film hyperosmolarity in 
DED. Trehalose is one of the osmoprotectants that 
has been suggested to be effective in treating mod￾erate to severe DED when added to AT, as com￾pared to saline [89]. L-carnitine, erythritol, betaine, 
sorbitol, and glycerin are other osmoprotectants 
used in AT manufacturing [90]. Some formulations 
may also include antioxidants, as oxidative stress 
has been linked to inflammation and tissue damage 
in DED [90]. These formulations may contain tau￾rine, vitamin A, epsilon amino caproic acid, vita￾mins E, B6 and B12 to provide antioxidant proper￾ties and protect ocular surface epithelial cells from 
oxidative stress [90, 91].
Liposomal sprays
Several studies have confirmed the effectiveness of 
liposomal sprays, which contain spherical vesicles 
of phospholipids with an embedded aqueous com￾ponent, in treating signs and symptoms of DED 
[92]. These sprays are sprayed over the closed eye￾lids and are absorbed onto the ocular surface from 
the eyelid margin through blinking. They have been 
found to improve TBUT, Schirmer test results, and 
LIPCOFs [93, 94]. A study compared four avail￾able sprays and found all effective in treating DED, 
with Ocuvers spray (Ocuvers, Innomedis AG, Ger￾many) group showing greater improvement in signs 
and symptoms [95]. A recent improvement in lipo￾somal spray production involves increasing phos￾pholipid concentration in the liposomal content, as 
shown in a recent study where a high-concentration 
phospholipid spray improved tear film stability and 
ocular comfort [96]. Another study investigated the 
combination of liposomes with osmoprotectants, 
electrolytes, and viscosity-enhancing agents to cre￾ate a formulation more similar to normal tear film 
[97]. Future trials are needed to further evaluate the 
role of liposomal sprays in the treatment of DED, 
despite the promising preliminary results.
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) agonist 
nasal sprays
nAChR agonists, such as varenicline (OC-01) and 
simpinicline (OC-02), activate the nasolacrimal reflex 
to increase tear secretion. They are administered as 
nasal sprays, offering advantages over topical drops 
by bypassing the ocular surface and reducing local 
adverse effects of preservatives [98]. These solutions 
can be used for various DED types and may become 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 Page 9 of 24 49
Vol.: (0123456789)
valuable adjunctive options for patients with multiple 
drop regimens.
The ONSET-2 clinical trial (Efficacy and Safety of 
OC-01 Nasal Spray on Signs and Symptoms of Dry 
Eye Disease) led to the approval of Tyrvaya® (Oys￾ter Point Pharma, NJ, USA) as a varenicline solution 
nasal spray for the treatment of DED [99]. A 50 µL 
intranasal spray was administered twice a day in each 
nostril. The study showed that the spray was effective 
and safe in treating symptoms and signs of different 
DED types [99]. In the MYSTIC study, which was a 
phase II randomized trial to evaluate the long-term 
efficacy and safety of OC-01 nasal spray for dry eye 
disease, participants received intranasal varenicline 
spray twice daily for 84 days. The treatment improved 
objective measurement of tear film production over 
a longer period of time, and no serious adverse 
effects were reported [100]. The efficacy and safety 
of simpinicline intranasal spray in DED was evalu￾ated in the PEARL study (clinical trial to evaluate the 
efficacy of OC-02 nasal spray on signs and symptoms 
of dry eye disease). The treatment consisted of a sin￾gle dose in-office treatment administered at first and 
second visits with an interval of 2–3 weeks, and it 
successfully provided rapid relief of DED symptoms 
without serious adverse effects [101].
Blood‑derived products
Severe cases of DED often require the substitution of 
tears with biologic fluids. Autologous serum drops, 
platelet-rich plasma (PRP), and umbilical cord blood 
serum (UCBS) are examples of such fluids, which 
contain growth factors, albumin, lactoferrin, immuno￾globulin, vitamins, and enzymes [11].
Autologous serum is rich in various growth fac￾tors, including epidermal growth factor (EGF), trans￾forming growth factor-β (TGF-β), platelet-derived 
growth factor (PDGF), and albumin [102]. The func￾tion of autologous serum drops for treating DED is 
improved in terms of epithelial healing, inflammation 
control, and symptomatic relief due to the presence of 
these growth factors [102].
Autologous serum is typically prepared from a 
patient’s own blood at a concentration of 20%, based 
on the actual concentration of biologic factors in 
normal tears. However, concentrations of 50% and 
100% have also been utilized with positive clinical 
results [103]. A recent pilot study was conducted to 
compare the effectiveness of autologous serum drops 
with allogenic serum drops for patients who cannot 
donate blood. The study concluded that the efficacy 
and tolerability of allogenic serum drops were similar 
to those of autologous serum drops for treating severe 
DED [104]. The primary challenges of using autolo￾gous serum for treating DED involve proper prepara￾tion and storage to minimize the risk of contamina￾tion [76]. Once the patient’s blood is collected and 
centrifuged, the resulting serum is diluted with saline, 
and it is advised to store the product in a refrigerator 
(up to 2 weeks) or freezer (up to 3 months) to ensure 
appropriate preservation with minimal contamination 
risk [105]. Autologous serum is a suitable option for 
managing DED, especially in inpatient settings [106].
From a clinical perspective, a review of 5 trials 
concluded that autologous serum provided greater 
short-term symptom control for DED compared to 
AT [77]. Another meta-analysis of randomized con￾trolled trials conducted in 2019 found that all seven 
studies included in the review showed that autolo￾gous serum was more effective than artificial tears in 
improving symptoms of DED [107].
PRP is generated to provide a high concentra￾tion of platelets in a small amount of plasma, which 
contains high concentrations of several growth fac￾tors (e.g., EGF, PDGF, TGF, and insulin-like growth 
factor [IGF]). Compared to autologous serum, PRP 
has been reported to have a higher concentration of 
biologic growth factors [108]. To be more concise, a 
recent study showed that PRP had higher concentra￾tions of some growth factors, such as TGF, but lower 
levels of others, such as PDGF, compared to autolo￾gous serum. Fibronectin concentration at baseline 
was similar between the two, but it increased in PRP 
after storage [109].
PRP has been found to significantly improve symp￾toms of moderate to severe chronic DED [110–112]. 
A study comparing PRP and autologous serum found 
that PRP was superior in terms of producing greater 
improvements in symptom scores and visual acu￾ity in patients with DED [109]. PRP preparation 
has an advantage over autologous serum in terms of 
incubation time, as it does not require the 2-h incu￾bation period needed for autologous serum prepara￾tion [109]. The shorter preparation time required for 
PRP compared to autologous serum may enhance 
patient convenience and preference for long-term 
treatment. As another specific characteristic, storing 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 10 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
PRP (which is allowed for 2 weeks in refrigerator and 
3 months in freezer) may lead to activation of plate￾lets and increase growth factor concentration, which 
may explain why frozen or refrigerated PRP could be 
more effective than fresh PRP [109, 113, 114].
A recent technique proposed for the treatment of 
severe DED is the injection of PRP into the lacrimal 
gland. The technique involves a single injection of 1 
ml of PRP through a transcutaneous approach from 
the outer one-third of the superior orbital rim at a 
depth of 4 mm [115].
The development of autologous blood-derived 
products has recently focused on platelet activation 
or lysis to release growth factors from their vesicles 
and enhance the concentration of growth factors in 
the final plasma. To obtain plasma-rich growth factor 
(PRGF), the patient’s whole blood sample is centri￾fuged similarly to the preparation process for autolo￾gous serum and PRP. However, the resulting plasma 
is activated with calcium chloride to form a clot 
and release growth factors from the activated plate￾lets [116]. The resulting supernatant plasma is then 
diluted to 20% with normal saline and can be stored 
in the freezer for up to 3 months or in the refrigerator 
for up to 1 week [117].
Administering PRGF four times a day has been 
found to alleviate symptoms of moderate to severe 
cases of DED that do not respond to conventional 
treatments [117]. A recent study showed that PRGF is 
effective in treating DED and has a better cost-effec￾tiveness profile than autologous serum [118]. PRGF 
eye drops have shown to be more effective than con￾ventional therapy for improving DED symptoms in 
eyes that have undergone refractive surgery [119].
Autologous platelet lysate (APL) is a blood 
derivative produced from PRP, where platelets are 
lysed through consecutive thermal shocks. This pro￾cess leads to the release of PDGFs into the plasma 
[120]. The administration of APL to the ocular 
surface is expected to enhance tear film stabil￾ity, reduce inflammation of the ocular surface, and 
improve the epithelial homeostasis due to the high 
concentration of PDGFs [121]. Reports have indi￾cated that APL eye drops are effective in the treat￾ment of patients with refractory DED that is sec￾ondary to primary Sjögren’s syndrome [120]. The 
efficacy of APL drops has also been assessed in 
patients with DED that is secondary to GVHD, and 
due to its anti-inflammatory properties, APL was 
found to be more effective than conventional treat￾ment in providing symptomatic relief to patients 
[122].
UCBS has been widely utilized in the context of 
ocular surface diseases and has demonstrated satis￾factory outcomes with regard to both effectiveness 
and safety [123]. UCBS is considered superior to 
other blood-derived products in terms of its ability 
to replace damaged corneal epithelial, endothelial, 
and stromal cells due to the higher concentration 
of growth factors as well as the presence of mes￾enchymal and epithelial stem cells [124]. Studies 
have indicated that UCBS is more efficacious than 
autologous serum in managing DED that is second￾ary to GVHD and Sjogren’s syndrome [125, 126]. 
Topical administration of UCBS, when given 6–10 
times a day for a duration of 2 to 6 months, has been 
found to accelerate the healing process, increase the 
number of goblet cells, and enhance corneal sensi￾tivity [123]. In addition to treating DED, UCBS has 
also shown successful outcomes in managing other 
ocular surface diseases such as persistent and recur￾rent epithelial defects, neurotrophic keratopathy, 
and ocular chemical burns [127].
In experimental models, human serum albumin 
(HAS) reduces apoptosis and inhibits caspase-3 
activity over the ocular surface [128]. A clinical 
pilot study demonstrated that the use of 5% HSA 
eye drops for a duration of 4 weeks resulted in an 
improvement in corneal staining, TBUT, and reduc￾tion in symptoms associated with DED [129]. A 
recent study compared the effectiveness of albumin 
5% eye drops with HA eye drops in treating severe 
ocular surface disease, and the results showed that 
both treatments had similar efficacy [130].
Nerve growth factor (NGF)
NGF is a neurotrophic agent involved in corneal 
sensitivity, ocular surface healing, and tear film pro￾duction [131]. Topical administration of recombi￾nant human nerve growth factor (rhNGF) has been 
recently utilized for managing neurotrophic ulcers 
and DED due to its various therapeutic effects [132]. 
Cenegermin® (rhNGF) eye drops received approval 
from the European Medicines Agency for the man￾agement of moderate to severe neurotrophic keratitis 
[133]. The REPARO study group conducted a Phase 
I clinical trial to evaluate the safety of rhNGF eye 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 Page 11 of 24 49
Vol.: (0123456789)
drops at a concentration of 20 µg/mL for managing 
neurotrophic keratitis. The study revealed that the 
treatment had a good safety profile, with eye irrita￾tion being the most frequently reported adverse effect 
[134]. The REPARO phase II study demonstrated the 
effectiveness of rhNGF eye drops at concentrations of 
10 μg/mL and 20 μg/mL, administered six times daily 
for a duration of 8 weeks, in treating neurotrophic 
keratitis [135].
A recent clinical trial conducted on patients with 
DED indicated that both 4 µg/mL and 20 µg/mL 
concentrations of rhNGF eye drops were effective 
in improving symptoms and signs of DED [133]. In 
the trial, patients with moderate to severe hyposecre￾tive DED were treated with rhNGF eye drops twice 
daily for a duration of 4 weeks. The study reported a 
rapid therapeutic effect within 1 week of initiating the 
treatment, which was likely due to the modulation of 
nerve function and the healing process of the corneal 
epithelium. This effect resulted in an improvement in 
DED symptoms and signs [133]. It appears that lower 
concentrations and less frequent regimens of rhNGF 
eye drops may be sufficient for managing DED com￾pared to the treatment of neurotrophic keratitis.
Amniotic membrane extract (AME)
The amniotic membrane has a dual role in the treat￾ment of ocular surface diseases. It acts as a scaffold 
to support the proliferation and migration of ocu￾lar surface epithelial cells, while also functioning as 
an immunomodulatory agent that reduces cytokine 
release and activation [136]. Clinical and experimen￾tal studies have utilized AME eye drops (AMEED) 
for the treatment of ocular surface conditions such as 
chemical burns, delayed epithelialization, and DED 
[137–139]. The preparation of AMEED involves the 
washing, disinfection, and centrifugation of human 
placental amniotic membrane. The product type 
determines whether it can be stored in a freezer or 
refrigerator and how often it should be used, typi￾cally ranging from 1 to 4 times a day for a period of 
3 to 30 days [140]. Studies have demonstrated that 
administering AMEED is a safe and effective method 
for treating the signs and symptoms of DED [141]. 
Despite the positive results, the conclusions regarding 
the efficacy of AMEED in treating DED are limited 
due to the diversity in manufacturing, storage, and 
treatment protocols, as well as the insufficiency of 
controlled clinical trials.
Anti-inflammatory treatment for DED
To prevent and treat chronic DED, controlling inflam￾mation is a critical step. Therefore, in cases of moder￾ate to severe DED, the use of anti-inflammatory drugs 
is required.
Corticosteroids
Indeed, short-term use of steroid eye drops is con￾sidered an effective option for treating acute flares of 
DED or refractory cases [142]. It should be noted that 
long-term administration of topical steroids for DED 
may increase the risk of developing cataracts and 
glaucoma, regardless of the potency of the steroid. 
However, low-potency agents like fluorometholone 
(FML) and loteprednol etabonate (LE), particularly 
in PF formulations, may have a lower risk of corneal 
penetration and adverse effects and have been advo￾cated for long-term use in selected cases [143].
Prednisolone drops are available in two formula￾tions, acetate (0.125% and 1% suspension) and phos￾phate (1% solution). Prednisolone acetate provides a 
more potent effect compared to prednisolone phos￾phate [144]. A randomized clinical trial found the 
superiority of prednisolone acetate 0.1% eye drops 
used three times a day for 30 days over AT in con￾trolling the signs and symptoms of DED [145]. Dexa￾methasone can be formulated as a 0.1–0.2% suspen￾sion or solution, or as a 0.05–0.2% sodium phosphate 
ointment [146]. Although concerns exist regarding 
the risk of intraocular pressure (IOP) rise in DED 
treatment with dexamethasone, in a case-series on 
31 patients treated with PF diluted dexamethasone 
(0.01%), it was found that 65% of patients showed 
moderate to complete resolution of symptoms with a 
minimal rise in (IOP) [147]. Significant improvement 
in signs and symptoms of DED has been reported 
with the use of iontophoretically delivered dexameth￾asone phosphate [148].
Treating DED has been effective with FML 
suspensions at concentrations of 0.1%, 0.2%, and 
0.25%, administered 2–4 times per day for a period 
of 2–4 weeks [12, 146]. FML is less likely to cause 
an increase in IOP compared to prednisolone and 
dexamethasone, which may suggest a safer profile 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 12 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
for long-term treatment of DED [146]. Similarly, 
low dose hydrocortisone 0.335% has been shown to 
reduce inflammation and symptoms of DED without 
any change in IOP [149]. A review of 16 prospec￾tive and retrospective studies has found that ophthal￾mic gel 0.5% or ophthalmic suspension 0.5% of LE 
are other steroid options gaining notice for having a 
lower effect on increasing IOP. The review showed 
that LE was effective, safe, and well-tolerated for 
treating DED with minimal adverse effects regarding 
IOP [150]. A study found that both FML 0.1% and 
LE 0.5% were effective in managing symptoms and 
signs of DED when applied for a long period of time. 
However, LE had a lower risk of causing elevation in 
IOP compared to FML 0.1% [151].
There is limited evidence regarding the efficacy of 
difluprednate, rimexolone, and clobetasone as topi￾cal corticosteroids for treating DED. However, in a 
clinical trial, clobetasone butyrate 0.1% was shown 
to improve DED symptoms and corneal and conjunc￾tival staining in patients with Sjögren’s syndrome 
when applied twice daily for one month [152].
Cyclosporine A
CsA is a calcineurin inhibitor able to suppress T-cells 
and reduce cytokine release in different inflamma￾tory diseases [153]. The effectiveness of topical CsA 
in the treatment of moderate to severe and refractory 
DED is well established [154]. Less severe cases of 
DED have also been treated with topical CsA in clini￾cal practice due to its safer profile compared to corti￾costeroids [155]. Apart from its immunomodulatory 
effects, CsA can also prevent apoptosis of conjuncti￾val epithelial cells and enhance the density of goblet 
cells on the ocular surface [156].
According to a study, CsA 0.05% emulsion has 
been suggested as a favorable treatment choice 
for DED after ocular surgeries, as it was found to 
improve DED symptoms after LASIK for up to 1 year 
[157]. Similarly, a study reported improvement in 
symptoms of DED after 3 months of treatment with 
CsA in patients who had undergone cataract surgery 
[158]. The effectiveness of CsA in treating surgery￾induced DED is based on its ability to increase epi￾thelial cell density, decrease surgical nerve damage, 
and reduce inflammation markers [159].
CsA 0.05% emulsion is among the available for￾mulations of CsA. Clinical trials have shown that 
twice-daily application of CsA 0.05% emulsion for a 
period of 6 months significantly improves signs and 
symptoms of DED, including corneal and conjuncti￾val staining, TBUT, and Schirmer tear values com￾pared to baseline [160, 161]. Burning and pain at 
the site of instillation are the most common adverse 
effects of CsA emulsion, reported in more than 40% 
of patients [161].
The second formulation of CsA available is an 
aqueous nanomicellar formulation called OTX-101 
0.09% (CsA 0.09%). It has been shown to increase 
tear production and reduce corneal staining in DED 
patients as early as 4 weeks after being administered 
twice daily [162, 163]. Switching from the emulsion 
formulation of CsA to the nanomicellar formula￾tion has been linked to a shorter delay in achieving 
an effective response, higher CsA concentration in 
ocular tissues, and a dose-dependent increase in tis￾sue concentration with repeated administration [164]. 
As another advantage, nanomicellar solution of CsA 
delivers therapeutic concentration without significant 
discomfort to the eye during instillation [165].
The third CsA formulation is a cationic unpre￾served emulsion containing CsA 0.1%. It was 
approved in Europe in 2015 for the treatment of DED 
in adults [166]. Despite of theoretical advantages, it 
could not reduce the rate of dysesthesia and stinging 
sensation over instillation as the main complication of 
CsA drops (reported in 37% of the cases using cati￾onic emulsion of CsA 0.1%) [167].
Twice daily dosing is the recommended regimen 
for all formulations of CsA therapy in the treatment 
of DED [155]. On the other hand, some experts rec￾ommend up to four times a day dosage for patients 
who are unresponsive to the twice-a-day regimen or 
for achieving a faster clinical response [168]. In cases 
of more severe DED, increasing the frequency of 
CsA regimens may lead to improved efficacy without 
significant systemic adsorption and adverse effects 
[169]. Increasing the concentration of CsA, however, 
may increase patient discomfort without providing 
additional therapeutic benefits [169]. Therefore, it 
appears that using CsA at concentrations of 0.05 to 
0.1% for DED provides the best balance of efficacy 
and complication status [169].
Studies have indicated that it may take around four 
to six months for CsA to alleviate DED symptoms 
[160, 170]. In order to achieve faster relief of symp￾toms in moderate to severe DED with CsA, some 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 Page 13 of 24 49
Vol.: (0123456789)
studies suggest using induction therapy with corti￾costeroid drops two weeks before starting CsA treat￾ment, or combining topical corticosteroid with CsA. 
This approach has been shown to provide more rapid 
and effective symptom relief compared to using CsA 
alone [171, 172].
To prevent a relapse of symptoms related to DED, 
it is suggested that CsA be used for an extended dura￾tion, and for some patients, indefinite usage may be 
required [154]. The authors of a study recommended 
extended maintenance therapy for chronic DED after 
observing disease progression upon discontinuation 
of CsA following one year of treatment [173]. After 
12 months of treatment, a study suggested that CsA 
dosage could be safely reduced from twice-daily 
application to once-daily treatment without compro￾mising treatment efficacy [73].
Tacrolimus
Tacrolimus is another inhibitor of calcineurin phos￾phatases, which inhibits inflammation through reduc￾ing T cell activation [174]. Tacrolimus and CsA dif￾fer in their mechanism of anti-inflammatory action 
as they target different proteins. While CsA binds to 
cyclophilin, tacrolimus binds to FK506 protein and 
exerts a calcineurin inhibitory action that is 100 times 
more potent than that of CsA [175]. Like CsA, topi￾cal administration of tacrolimus is often associated 
with an intense stinging sensation as the main adverse 
effect. However, many patients can tolerate this sen￾sation without it affecting their adherence to treat￾ment [176].
There is some evidence from studies to suggest 
that topical application of tacrolimus 0.03% may be 
useful in the treatment of DED [177, 178]. According 
to these studies, clinical response to topical tacroli￾mus 0.03% was observed after 7 days of treatment, 
and the clinical improvement was seen to continue 
over a period of 3 months [179]. A comparison of 
the efficacy of twice-daily application of tacrolimus 
0.03% and CsA 0.05% in treating DED revealed that 
both medications were effective in controlling signs 
and symptoms. However, there were no significant 
differences in efficacy between the two treatments 
over a 6-month period [177].
Lifitegrast
Lifitegrast (Xiidra®) is an ophthalmic solution 
approved for the treatment of DED as an anti-inflam￾matory medication in a concentration of 5% [180]. 
Lifitegrast possesses anti-inflammatory properties 
through inhibiting T cell adhesion and migration 
[181]. It works by binding to lymphocyte function￾associated antigen-1 (LFA-1), which inhibits its inter￾action with overexpressed intercellular adhesion mol￾ecule-1 (ICAM-1) on vascular endothelial cells of the 
inflamed ocular surface in DED [182]. Lifitegrast has 
been utilized in the treatment of DED across a broad 
range of severity (from mild to severe) and various 
pathophysiologic types (ranging from aqueous defi￾cient to evaporative and combined type) [183]. In the 
trial conducted for the approval of lifitegrast, which 
involved 771 patients, the use of 5.0% lifitegrast twice 
daily for 84 days was found to be more effective than 
the placebo in improving both objective and subjec￾tive parameters of DED [180]. In the SONATA study, 
a multicenter trial involving 331 patients, it was 
found that the administration of lifitegrast ophthal￾mic solution at a concentration of 5.0% twice daily 
for 365 days was effective, well-tolerated, and safe for 
treating DED [184]. A recent meta-analysis, which 
included 5 clinical trials, found that lifitegrast was 
more effective than the placebo in improving OSDI 
score, ocular surface staining, and TBUT [183]. 
When administered twice a day, lifitegrast has been 
observed to improve the signs and symptoms of DED 
within 2 weeks [180]. The most common adverse 
effects associated with the use of lifitegrast are instil￾lation site burning, reduced visual acuity, and dysgeu￾sia (a change in the sense of taste) [183, 184].
Non‑steroidal anti‑inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
NSAIDs are commonly used in general medicine and 
ophthalmology because they do not require treat￾ment-dependency, unlike steroid therapy, and have 
fewer adverse reactions. They exert anti-inflamma￾tory effects by inhibiting cyclooxygenase, suppress￾ing prostaglandin synthesis, and downregulating the 
migration and activity of phagocytes [185]. Prano￾profen drops, which belong to the propionic acid￾derived NSAIDs, have been associated with rapid 
relief of DED symptoms and the stimulation of tear 
secretion, whether used alone or in combination with 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 14 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
HA. [186] Combining diclofenac eye drops with 
HA-containing lubricants has also been reported to 
improve DED symptoms without significant con￾cerns regarding ocular surface irritation or secondary 
infection after long-term use.[187, 188]. Bromfenac 
sodium eye drops, as another NSAID, have been 
shown to be superior to other NSAIDs in terms of 
penetrability and sustained ocular surface concentra￾tion. This allows for long-term inflammation control 
with fewer daily instillations [189]. In addition to its 
anti-inflammatory effects on the ocular surface, bro￾mfenac sodium eye drops have also been suggested to 
enhance lacrimal gland function, which may contrib￾ute to its efficacy in treating DED [190]. A recent trial 
demonstrated that the combination of 0.05% CsA and 
0.1% diclofenac sodium eye drops was effective in 
rapidly alleviating symptoms and improving clinical 
outcomes in patients with DED [191].
The use of NSAIDs to treat DED may present 
some challenges. In cases where DED results from 
immune-mediated diseases such as Sjogren’s syn￾drome, the anti-inflammatory effects of NSAIDs 
are generally considered inadequate for controlling 
inflammation of the ocular surface compared to ster￾oid drops [192]. Additionally, certain NSAIDs have 
been linked to corneal epithelial cell apoptosis and 
decreased corneal sensitivity in both DED patients 
and individuals without the condition, which may 
prompt ophthalmologists to exercise caution when 
considering NSAID use in individuals with DED 
[193]. In summary, studies suggest that NSAIDs can 
effectively alleviate symptoms of mild to moderate 
chronic DED. However, they should be combined 
with appropriate tear replacement therapy, monitored 
carefully, and stopped immediately if there are any 
new corneal epithelial defects [194]. Patients with 
common mild DED caused by environmental factors, 
such as low humidity, are not recommended to be 
treated with NSAIDs [195].
Essential fatty acids
An elevated omega-3 to omega-6 ratio has been 
suggested to possess anti-inflammatory properties 
as arachidonic acid, a component of omega-6 fatty 
acids, serves as a precursor for various inflamma￾tory cytokines implicated in DED [196]. Omega-3 
supplementation for treating DED mainly functions 
by replacing omega-6 with omega-3, which has 
anti-inflammatory properties [12]. A 2014 meta￾analysis of 5 studies found that increased intake of 
omega-3 was effective in managing signs and symp￾toms of DED [197]. A 2019 meta-analysis of 34 tri￾als confirmed the efficacy of long-chain omega-3 
supplementation in the management of DED [198]. 
The dosage of omega-3 supplementation is different 
based on the formulation and ingredients of the com￾mercial medications. Despite the fact that the efficacy 
of omega-3 supplementation in reducing DED signs, 
as measured by the Schirmer test and tear film osmo￾larity, has been established, there remains uncertainty 
about its effectiveness in reducing DED symptoms 
[198]. A trial did not find any clinically significant 
improvement in DED symptoms after omega-3 sup￾plementation [199].
A recent study showed that a topical formulation 
containing omega-3 was effective in improving signs 
and symptoms of evaporative DED over an 8-week 
treatment period and did not result in significant 
adverse effects [200].
Mucin secretagogues and mimickers
Diquafosol tetrasodium (DQS)
DQS solution 3% (Diquas®) is a purinergic P2Y2 
agonist which increases both mucin and tear produc￾tion through its effect on conjunctival goblet cells and 
epithelium [28]. DQS activates intracellular calcium￾related cascades after binding to P2Y2 receptors on 
conjunctival epithelial cells, resulting in mucin secre￾tion and tear fluid production without the involvement 
of lacrimal gland function [201].
DQS 3% has been shown in numerous studies to 
improve both signs and symptoms of various types of 
DED, such as aqueous deficient and evaporative DED 
[202, 203]. A randomized clinical trial conducted on 
286 Japanese patients showed that DQS 1% and 3% 
ophthalmic solutions administered 6 times per day for 
6 weeks were both safe and effective in treating DED 
patients [204]. During another experiment that com￾pared DQS 3% and HA 0.1%, it was found that DQS 
was more effective at enhancing Rose Bengal corneal 
staining. However, both treatments showed similar 
improvement in fluorescein staining scores [205]. The 
efficacy of DQS ophthalmic solution has also been 
reported in contact lens-related DED and dry eye 
after ocular surgeries [206, 207]. Conjunctival edema 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 Page 15 of 24 49
Vol.: (0123456789)
and stinging sensation are the most common side 
effects of the treatment with DQS [208].
One significant obstacle in the treatment with DQS 
is the need for frequent administration to achieve the 
desired therapeutic effect. According to a survey, 80% 
of patients used DQS 3% four times or less per day, 
whereas the recommended dosage for optimal effi￾cacy is six times daily [209]. To enhance patient com￾pliance, DE-089C has been proposed as a sustained￾release formulation of DQS solution, which requires 
less frequent administration (three times a day) while 
maintaining comparable efficacy and safety to the 
original solution [210].
Rebamipide
Rebacer® and Eyesec®, which contain rebamipide, 
are other treatments that are based on mucin. They 
work by stimulating the production of goblet cells 
and promoting the secretion of mucin, in addition to 
possessing some anti-inflammatory properties [28]. 
Rebamipide is an amino acid analog which activates 
enzymatic production of mucins in different epithe￾lial cells [211]. In conjunctival and corneal cells, 
rebamipide is believed to enhance the production of 
both free secreted and membrane-associated mucins 
[212]. Additionally, rebamipide can decrease the pro￾duction of inflammatory cytokines, resulting in lower 
lymphocyte activation and eosinophil infiltration in 
chronic and allergic inflammation, respectively [213].
The use of rebamipide 2% ophthalmic solution, 
four times a day for four weeks, has resulted in the 
stabilization of the tear film and alleviation of both 
the symptoms and signs of DED [214, 215]. While 
rebamipide 1% is also an effective treatment for DED, 
rebamipide 2% may provide better results in certain 
measures of treatment response [216]. It is well-toler￾ated and no serious adverse effects have been reported 
for rebamipide 2% [217].
Vitamin A
Vitamin A in topical forms such as retinyl or retinol 
palmitate, along with its metabolite retinoic acid, 
has been proposed as a mucin secretagogue for the 
treatment of DED. These formulations are avail￾able as ointments (0.01%, 0.05%, and 0.1%), gels 
(0.1%), emulsions (0.01%), and solutions (0.05%) 
[218, 219]. The parameters that have shown the most 
significant improvement following topical vitamin A 
therapy are blurred vision, ocular surface staining, 
goblet cell density, and TBUT [220]. Based on cur￾rent literature, topical vitamin A supplementation is 
typically reserved for patients with severe DED that 
is unresponsive to other treatments, particularly in 
those with mucin impairment indicated by clinical 
tests [221]. In a study that compared the effective￾ness of topical vitamin A and CsA in treating severe 
DED patients, topical vitamin A showed better out￾comes in terms of treatment adherence, improvement 
of blurred vision, and increased Schirmer test scores 
[218].
Topical vitamin A may have a unique application 
in future, particularly for the increasing number of 
glaucoma patients who develop secondary mucin￾related DED. A recent study on glaucoma patients 
with drug-induced damage to their goblet cells found 
that the long-term use of topical vitamin A was more 
effective than carbomer gel in increasing goblet cell 
density and reducing symptoms [222]. It is worth 
noting that vitamin A can also help reduce epithelial 
keratinization in cases of ocular surface failure result￾ing from severe DED or other ocular surface diseases, 
not just limited to DED [223].
There is evidence to suggest that systemic vita￾min A supplementation, whether administered orally 
or intramuscularly, can lead to improved goblet cell 
density and repopulation, as well as re-epitheliali￾zation of the ocular surface [220]. While the precise 
role of systemic vitamin A therapy in DED is not 
fully understood based on current literature, it may 
be advisable to consider systemic supplementation in 
patients with confirmed vitamin A deficiency or those 
at high risk due to inadequate intake.
Lubricin
Lubricin (Proteoglycan 4) is a large glycoprotein 
primarily produced in synoviocytes to safeguard 
articular cartilage, and it has also been suggested as 
a substitute for mucin in the treatment of DED [28]. 
Lubricin has also been discovered to exist at the nor￾mal ocular surface, where it acts as a lubricant for the 
cornea and conjunctiva [224]. According to a study, 
recombinant human lubricin was found to be more 
effective than HA eye drops in providing relief from 
signs and symptoms of moderate DED [61].
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 16 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
Conclusion
DED is a complex disease that affects the LFU, 
and recent research has uncovered new aspects of 
its pathophysiology and potential therapeutic tar￾gets. While conventional DED management focuses 
on breaking the vicious cycle of tear film hyper￾osmolarity through empirical tear substitution and 
anti-inflammatory therapy, a more comprehensive 
approach may be needed. This approach would 
involve a thorough examination of etiological trig￾gers and adopting a layer-by-layer approach to iden￾tify the most impaired component of the tear film. 
By understanding the classification of DED, using a 
targeted diagnostic approach for the primary defect, 
and implementing pathophysiology-specific therapy, 
the management of persistent DED may be improved. 
The most recent literature suggests selecting a thera￾peutic option based on the most affected layer (lipid 
versus aqueous versus mucin) and determining the 
intensity of treatment based on the severity of the 
condition.
Literature search
For this review article, an extensive literature search 
was conducted on electronic databases, such as Pub￾Med, Scopus, and Web of Science. The search was 
limited to human studies published in any language 
up to March 2023. The search was conducted using 
the following keywords: "dry eye syndrome," "ocular 
surface disease," "medical management," "artificial 
tears," "topical immunomodulators," and "meibo￾mian gland dysfunction." In addition to the electronic 
database search, the reference lists of relevant articles 
were also reviewed to identify additional studies. The 
inclusion criteria for this review article were studies 
investigating the medical management of dry eye syn￾drome, including randomized controlled trials, sys￾tematic reviews, and meta-analyses.
Author contributions T.S. and A.A. searched the literature 
and wrote the main text of the manuscript. A.B and R.A. and 
F.M. reviewed the manuscript. T.S. and J.J. edited the text and 
prepared the tables.
Funding This research did not receive any specific grant 
from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for￾profit sectors.
Declarations
Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing inter￾ests.
References
1. Stapleton F, Alves M, Bunya VY, Jalbert I, Lekhanont 
K, Malet F et  al (2017) TFOS DEWS II epidemiology 
report. Ocul Surf 15(3):334–365
2. Morthen MK, Magno MS, Utheim TP, Snieder H, Jan￾sonius N, Hammond CJ et  al (2022) The vision-related 
burden of dry eye. Ocul Surf 23:207–215
3. Morthen MK, Magno MS, Utheim TP, Snieder H, Ham￾mond CJ, Vehof J (2021) The physical and mental bur￾den of dry eye disease: a large population-based study 
investigating the relationship with health-related quality 
of life and its determinants. Ocul Surf 21:107–117
4. Hossain P, Siffel C, Joseph C, Meunier J, Markowitz JT, 
Dana R (2021) Patient-reported burden of dry eye dis￾ease in the UK: a cross-sectional web-based survey. BMJ 
Open 11(3):e039209
5. Yu J, Asche CV, Fairchild CJ (2011) The economic bur￾den of dry eye disease in the United States: a decision 
tree analysis. Cornea 30(4):379–387
6. Clegg JP, Guest JF, Lehman A, Smith AF (2006) The 
annual cost of dry eye syndrome in France, Germany, 
Italy, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom among 
patients managed by ophthalmologists. Ophthalmic Epi￾demiol 13(4):263–274
7. Yang W, Luo Y, Wu S, Niu X, Yan Y, Qiao C et al (2021) 
Estimated annual economic burden of dry eye disease 
based on a multi-center analysis in china: a retrospective 
study. Front Med 8:771352
8. McDonald M, Patel DA, Keith MS, Snedecor SJ (2016) 
Economic and humanistic burden of dry eye disease in 
Europe, North America, and Asia: a systematic literature 
review. Ocul Surf 14(2):144–167
9. Stern ME, Beuerman RW, Fox RI, Gao J, Mircheff 
AK, Pflugfelder SC (1998) The pathology of dry eye: 
the interaction between the ocular surface and lacrimal 
glands. Cornea 17(6):584–589
10. Craig JP, Nelson JD, Azar DT, Belmonte C, Bron AJ, 
Chauhan SK et al (2017) TFOS DEWS II report execu￾tive summary. Ocul Surf 15(4):802–812
11. Akpek EK, Amescua G, Farid M, Garcia-Ferrer FJ, Lin 
A, Rhee MK et  al (2019) Dry eye syndrome preferred 
practice pattern®. Ophthalmology 126(1):P286-p334
12. Mohamed HB, Abd El-Hamid BN, Fathalla D, Fouad EA 
(2022) Current trends in pharmaceutical treatment of dry 
eye disease: a review. Eur J Pharm Sci 175:106206
13. Aragona P, Giannaccare G, Mencucci R, Rubino P, 
Cantera E, Rolando M (2021) Modern approach to the 
treatment of dry eye, a complex multifactorial disease: a 
P.I.C.A.S.S.O. board review. Br J Ophthalmol 105(4):446
14. Dunn JD, Karpecki PM, Meske ME, Reissman D (2021) 
Evolving knowledge of the unmet needs in dry eye dis￾ease. Am J Manag Care 27(2 Suppl):S23-s32
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 Page 17 of 24 49
Vol.: (0123456789)
15. Guzmán M, Miglio M, Keitelman I, Shiromizu CM, Sab￾bione F, Fuentes F et  al (2020) Transient tear hyperos￾molarity disrupts the neuroimmune homeostasis of the 
ocular surface and facilitates dry eye onset. Immunology 
161(2):148–161
16. Messmer EM (2015) The pathophysiology, diagnosis, 
and treatment of dry eye disease. Deutsch Arzteblatt Int 
112(5):71–81; quiz 2
17. Lemp M, Crews L, Bron A, Foulks G, Sullivan B (2012) 
Distribution of aqueous-deficient and evaporative dry eye 
in a clinic-based patient cohort: a retrospective study. 
Cornea 31:472–478
18. Azcarate PM, Venincasa VD, Feuer W, Stanczyk F, 
Schally AV, Galor A (2014) Androgen deficiency and dry 
eye syndrome in the aging male. Invest Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci 55(8):5046–5053
19. Rolando M, Cantera E, Mencucci R, Rubino P, Aragona 
P (2018) The correct diagnosis and therapeutic man￾agement of tear dysfunction: recommendations of the 
P.I.C.A.S.S.O. board. Int Ophthalmol 38(2):875–895
20. Bacman S, Berra A, Sterin-Borda L, Borda E (2001) 
Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor antibodies as a new 
marker of dry eye Sjögren syndrome. Invest Ophthalmol 
Vis Sci 42(2):321–327
21. Vazirani J, Donthineni PR, Goel S, Sane SS, Mahuvakar 
S, Narang P et  al (2020) Chronic cicatrizing conjuncti￾vitis: a review of the differential diagnosis and an algo￾rithmic approach to management. Indian J Ophthalmol 
68(11):2349–2355
22. Vereertbrugghen A, Galletti JG (2022) Corneal nerves 
and their role in dry eye pathophysiology. Exp Eye Res 
222:109191
23. Nelson JD, Shimazaki J, Benitez-del-Castillo JM, Craig 
JP, McCulley JP, Den S et  al (2011) The international 
workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of the 
definition and classification subcommittee. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 52(4):1930–1937
24. Ranti C, Jones W, Klin A, Shultz S (2020) Blink rate 
patterns provide a reliable measure of individual 
engagement with scene content. Sci Rep 10(1):8267
25. Moon J, Kim KW, Moon N (2016) Smartphone use is 
a risk factor for pediatric dry eye disease according to 
region and age: a case control study. BMC Ophthalmol 
16:188
26. Dutta P (2022) Increased screen time and severity 
of asthenopic and ocular dryness symptoms during 
COVID-19 pandemic. Vis Dev Rehabil
27. Tsubota K, Yokoi N, Watanabe H, Dogru M, Kojima T, 
Yamada M et al (2020) A new perspective on dry eye 
classification: proposal by the asia dry eye society. Eye 
Contact Lens 46:s2–s13
28. Baudouin C, Rolando M, Benitez Del Castillo JM, 
Messmer EM, Figueiredo FC, Irkec M et  al (2019) 
Reconsidering the central role of mucins in dry eye and 
ocular surface diseases. Prog Retin Eye Res 71:68–87
29. Colorado LH, Alzahrani Y, Pritchard N, Efron N 
(2016) Time course of changes in goblet cell density in 
symptomatic and asymptomatic contact lens wearers. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 57(6):2888–2894
30. Pisella PJ, Malet F, Lejeune S, Brignole F, Debbasch 
C, Bara J et al (2001) Ocular surface changes induced 
by contact lens wear. Cornea 20(8):820–825
31. Baudouin C, Labbé A, Liang H, Pauly A, Brignole￾Baudouin F (2010) Preservatives in eyedrops: the 
good, the bad and the ugly. Prog Retin Eye Res 
29(4):312–334
32. Dis S, Agnifili L, Cecannecchia S, A DIG, Ciancaglini 
M, (2018) In  vivo analysis of prostaglandins-induced 
ocular surface and periocular adnexa modifications 
in patients with Glaucoma. In  vivo (Athens, Greece). 
32(2):211–220
33. Su Y, Liang Q, Su G, Wang N, Baudouin C, Labbé A 
(2018) Spontaneous eye blink patterns in dry eye: 
clinical correlations. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 
59(12):5149–5156
34. Arriola-Villalobos P, Fernández-Vigo JI, Díaz-Valle D, 
Peraza-Nieves JE, Fernández-Pérez C, Benítez-Del￾Castillo JM (2015) Assessment of lower tear meniscus 
measurements obtained with Keratograph and agreement 
with Fourier-domain optical-coherence tomography. Br J 
Ophthalmol 99(8):1120–1125
35. Shinzawa M, Dogru M, Miyasaka K, Shimazaki J, 
Sekiryu T (2018) Application of CASIA SS-1000 optical 
coherence tomography tear meniscus imaging in testing 
the efficacy of new strip meniscometry in dry eye diag￾nosis. Eye Contact Lens 44(Suppl 1):S44–S49
36. Veres A, Tapasztó B, Kosina-Hagyó K, Somfai GM, 
Németh J (2011) Imaging lid-parallel conjunctival folds 
with OCT and comparing its grading with the slit lamp 
classification in dry eye patients and normal subjects. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 52(6):2945–2951
37. Pult H, Bandlitz S (2018) Lid-Parallel Conjunctival 
Folds and Their Ability to Predict Dry Eye. Eye Contact 
Lens 44(Suppl 2):S113–S119
38. Németh J, Fodor E, Lang Z, Kosina-Hagyó K, Berta 
A, Komár T et al (2012) Lid-parallel conjunctival folds 
(LIPCOF) and dry eye: a multicentre study. Br J Ophthal￾mol 96(11):1380–1385
39. Woods J, Hutchings N, Srinivasan S, Jones L (2020) 
Geographic distribution of corneal staining in sympto￾matic dry eye. Ocul Surf 18(2):258–266
40. Eom Y, Lee J-S, Keun Lee H, Myung Kim H, Suk SJ 
(2015) Comparison of conjunctival staining between lis￾samine green and yellow filtered fluorescein sodium. Can 
J Ophthalmol 50(4):273–277
41. Senchyna M, Wax MB (2008) Quantitative assessment of 
tear production: a review of methods and utility in dry 
eye drug discovery. J Ocular Biol Dis Inform 1(1):1–6
42. Wang X, Fan X, Wu Y, Mou Y, Min J, Jin X (2022) Rear 
4-min Schirmer test, a modified indicator of Schirmer 
test in diagnosing dry eye. Sci Rep 12(1):6272
43. Su TY, Ho WT, Lu CY, Chang SW, Chiang HK (2015) 
Correlations among ocular surface temperature differ￾ence value, the tear meniscus height, Schirmer’s test 
and fluorescein tear film break up time. Br J Ophthalmol 
99(4):482–487
44. Paugh J, Tse J, Nguyen T, Sasai A, Chen E, Jesus M et al 
(2019) Efficacy of the fluorescein tear breakup time test 
in dry eye. Cornea 39:1
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 18 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
45. Lemp MA, Bron AJ, Baudouin C, Benítez Del Castillo 
JM, Geffen D, Tauber J et al (2011) Tear osmolarity in 
the diagnosis and management of dry eye disease. Am J 
Ophthalmol 151(5):792–8.e1
46. Park JY, Kim BG, Kim JS, Hwang JH (2018) Matrix 
metalloproteinase 9 point-of-care immunoassay result 
predicts response to topical cyclosporine treatment in dry 
eye disease. Transl Vis Sci Technol. 7(5):31
47. Ponzini E, Scotti L, Grandori R, Tavazzi S, Zambon A 
(2020) Lactoferrin concentration in human tears and ocu￾lar diseases: a meta-analysis. Investig Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci 61(12):9
48. Li J, Ma J, Hu M, Yu J, Zhao Y (2020) Assessment of 
tear film lipid layer thickness in patients with Meibomian 
gland dysfunction at different ages. BMC Ophthalmol 
20(1):394
49. Kawashima M, Uchino M, Yokoi N, Uchino Y, Dogru 
M, Komuro A et al (2014) The association between dry 
eye disease and physical activity as well as sedentary 
behavior: results from the Osaka study. J Ophthalmol 
2014:943786
50. Molina-Leyva I, Molina-Leyva A, Riquelme-Gallego B, 
Cano-Ibáñez N, García-Molina L, Bueno-Cavanillas A 
(2020) Effectiveness of mediterranean diet implementa￾tion in dry eye parameters: a study of PREDIMED-PLUS 
trial. Nutrients 12(5):1289
51. Inaba T, Ohnishi-Kameyama M, Liu Y, Tanaka Y, Kob￾ori M, Tamaki S et al (2022) Quercetin improves lacri￾mal gland function through its anti-oxidant actions: evi￾dence from animal studies, and a pilot study in healthy 
human volunteers. Front Nutr 9:974530
52. Abusharha AA, Pearce EI (2013) The effect of low 
humidity on the human tear film. Cornea 32(4):429–434
53. Shen G, Qi Q, Ma X (2016) Effect of moisture chamber 
spectacles on tear functions in dry eye disease. Optom 
Vis Sci Off Publ Am Acad Optom 93(2):158–164
54. Ren Y, Chen J, Zheng Q, Chen W (2018) Short-term 
effect of a developed warming moist chamber goggle for 
video display terminal-associated dry eye. BMC Oph￾thalmol 18(1):33
55. Hirayama M, Murat D, Liu Y, Kojima T, Kawakita 
T, Tsubota K (2013) Efficacy of a novel moist cool air 
device in office workers with dry eye disease. Acta Oph￾thalmol 91(8):756–762
56. Kamøy B, Magno M, Nøland ST, Moe MC, Petrovski G, 
Vehof J et al (2022) Video display terminal use and dry 
eye: preventive measures and future perspectives. Acta 
Ophthalmol 100(7):723–739
57. Yokoi N, Komuro A (2004) Non-invasive methods of 
assessing the tear film. Exp Eye Res 78(3):399–407
58. Arita R, Morishige N, Koh S, Shirakawa R, Kawashima 
M, Sakimoto T et al (2015) Increased tear fluid produc￾tion as a compensatory response to meibomian gland 
loss: a multicenter cross-sectional study. Ophthalmology 
122(5):925–933
59. Yokoi N, Georgiev GA, Kato H, Komuro A, Sonomura 
Y, Sotozono C et al (2017) Classification of fluorescein 
breakup patterns: a novel method of differential diagno￾sis for dry eye. Am J Ophthalmol 180:72–85
60. Garrigue J-S, Amrane M, Faure M-O, Holopainen J, 
Tong L (2017) Relevance of lipid-based products in the 
management of dry eye disease. J Ocular Pharmacol 
Ther. 33:647
61. Lambiase A, Sullivan BD, Schmidt TA, Sullivan DA, Jay 
GD, Truitt ER 3rd et al (2017) A two-week, randomized, 
double-masked study to evaluate safety and efficacy of 
lubricin (150 μg/mL) eye drops versus sodium hyaluro￾nate (HA) 0.18% eye drops (Vismed®) in patients with 
moderate dry eye disease. Ocul Surf 15(1):77–87
62. Bottomley A, Jones D, Claassens L (2009) Patient￾reported outcomes: assessment and current perspectives 
of the guidelines of the Food and Drug Administration 
and the reflection paper of the European Medicines 
Agency. Eur J Cancer 45(3):347–353
63. Okumura Y, Inomata T, Iwata N, Sung J, Fujimoto K, 
Fujio K et al (2020) A Review of dry eye questionnaires: 
measuring patient-reported outcomes and health-related 
quality of life. Diagnostics 10(8):559
64. Spain J, Nemeth J, Germany H, Kaynak P, Horwarth￾Winthers J, India A et al (2005) The triple classification 
of dry eye for practical clinical use. Eur J Ophthalmol 
15:660–667
65. Behrens A, Doyle JJ, Stern L, Chuck RS, McDonnell 
PJ, Azar DT et al (2006) Dysfunctional tear syndrome: a 
Delphi approach to treatment recommendations. Cornea 
25(8):900–907
66. Lemp M (2007) The definition and classification of dry 
eye disease: report of the definition and classification 
subcommittee of the international dry eye workShop 
(2007). Ocul Surf 5:75–92
67. Baudouin C, Aragona P, Van Setten G, Rolando M, Irkeç 
M, BenítezdelCastillo J et  al (2014) Diagnosing the 
severity of dry eye: a clear and practical algorithm. Br J 
Ophthalmol 98(9):1168–1176
68. Barabino S, Aragona P, di Zazzo A, Rolando M (2021) 
Updated definition and classification of dry eye disease: 
renewed proposals using the nominal group and Delphi 
techniques. Eur J Ophthalmol 31(1):42–48
69. Rodriguez-Garcia A, Babayan-Sosa A, Ramirez￾Miranda A, Cruz-Valdes C, Hernandez-Quintela 
E, Hernandez-Camarena J et  al (2022) A practical 
approach to severity classification and treatment of 
dry eye disease: a proposal from the Mexican dry eye 
disease expert panel. Clin Ophthalmol (Auckland, NZ) 
16:1331–1355
70. Murube J, Németh J, Höh H, Kaynak-Hekimhan P, Hor￾wath-Winter J, Agarwal A et al (2005) The triple classifi￾cation of dry eye for practical clinical use. Eur J Ophthal￾mol 15(6):660–667
71. Uchino Y, Uchino M, Yokoi N, Dogru M, Kawashima M, 
Komuro A et al (2016) Impact of cigarette smoking on 
tear function and correlation between conjunctival goblet 
cells and tear MUC5AC concentration in office workers. 
Sci Rep 6(1):27699
72. Tsubota K, Nakamori K (1995) Effects of ocular sur￾face area and blink rate on tear dynamics (Chicago, Ill : 
1960). Archiv Ophthalmol 113(2):155–158
73. Su MY, Perry HD, Barsam A, Perry AR, Donnenfeld 
ED, Wittpenn JR et al (2011) The effect of decreasing the 
dosage of cyclosporine A 0.05% on dry eye disease after 
1 year of twice-daily therapy. Cornea 30(10):1098–1104
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 Page 19 of 24 49
Vol.: (0123456789)
74. Haber SL, Benson V, Buckway CJ, Gonzales JM, 
Romanet D, Scholes B (2019) Lifitegrast: a novel drug 
for patients with dry eye disease. Ther Adv Ophthalmol 
11:2515841419870366
75. Giannaccare G, Pellegrini M, Sebastiani S, Bernabei F, 
Roda M, Taroni L et al (2019) Efficacy of omega-3 fatty 
acid supplementation for treatment of dry eye disease: 
a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Cornea 
38(5):565–573
76. Kojima T, Dogru M, Kawashima M, Nakamura S, Tsub￾ota K (2020) Advances in the diagnosis and treatment of 
dry eye. Prog Retin Eye Res 78:100842
77. Pan Q, Angelina A, Marrone M, Stark WJ, Akpek 
EK (2017) Autologous serum eye drops for dry eye. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2(2):327
78. He H, Ding H, Liao A, Liu Q, Yang J, Zhong X (2010) 
Effects of mycophenolate mofetil on proliferation and 
mucin-5AC expression in human conjunctival goblet 
cells in vitro. Mol Vis 16:1913–1919
79. Dogru M, Tsubota K (2011) Pharmacotherapy of dry 
eye. Expert Opin Pharmacother 12(3):325–334
80. Ribeiro M, Barbosa F, Ribeiro L, Sousa-Rodrigues C, 
Ribeiro E (2019) Effectiveness of using preservative-free 
artificial tears versus preserved lubricants for the treat￾ment of dry eyes: a systematic review. Arq Bras Oftalmol 
82:436–445
81. Lievens C, Berdy G, Douglass D, Montaquila S, Lin H, 
Simmons P et al (2018) Evaluation of an enhanced vis￾cosity artificial tear for moderate to severe dry eye dis￾ease: A multicenter, double-masked, randomized 30-day 
study. Contact Lens Anterior Eye. 42:443
82. Lievens C, Berdy G, Douglass D, Montaquila S, Lin H, 
Simmons P et al (2019) Evaluation of an enhanced vis￾cosity artificial tear for moderate to severe dry eye dis￾ease: a multicenter, double-masked, randomized 30-day 
study. Contact Lens Anterior Eye J Br Contact Lens 
Assoc 42(4):443–449
83. Prather WC, Stoecker JF, Vehige JG, Simmons PA 
(2002) Clinical performance of a new mid-viscosity arti￾ficial tear for dry eye treatment. Invest Ophthalmol V Sci 
43(13):3152
84. Hynnekleiv L, Magno M, Vernhardsdottir R, Moschow￾its E, Tønseth K, Dartt D et  al (2022) Hyaluronic acid 
in the treatment of dry eye disease. Acta Ophthalmol 
100:844
85. Yang YJ, Lee WY, Kim YJ, Hong YP (2021) A meta￾analysis of the efficacy of hyaluronic acid eye drops for 
the treatment of dry eye syndrome. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health 18(5):2383
86. Kojima T, Nagata T, Kudo H, Mueller-Lierheim W, 
van Setten G, Dogru M et al (2020) The effects of high 
molecular weight hyaluronic acid eye drop application in 
environmental dry eye stress model mice. Int J Mol Sci 
21:3516
87. Daull P, Amrane M, Ismail D, Cwiklik L, Baudouin C, 
Leonardi A et al (2020) Cationic emulsion-based artifi￾cial tears as a mimic of functional healthy tear film for 
restoration of ocular surface homeostasis in dry eye dis￾ease. J Ocular Pharmacol Ther 36:355
88. Eftimov P, Yokoi N, Melo A, Daull P (2021) Interactions 
of meibum and tears with mucomimetic polymers: a hint 
towards the interplay between the layers of the tear film. 
Int J Mol Sci 22:2747
89. Hernandez E, Taisne C, Lussignol M, Esclatine A, 
Labetoulle M (2021) Commercially available eye drops 
containing trehalose protect against dry conditions via 
autophagy induction. J Ocular Pharmacol Ther Off J 
Assoc Ocular Pharmacol Ther 37:386
90. Labetoulle M, Benitez-del-Castillo JM, Barabino S, Her￾rero Vanrell R, Daull P, Garrigue J-S et al (2022) Arti￾ficial tears: biological role of their ingredients in the 
management of dry eye disease. Int J Mol Sci [Internet]. 
23(5):2434
91. Bucolo C, Fidilio A, Platania C, Geraci F, Lazzara F, 
Drago F (2017) Antioxidant and Osmoprotecting activity 
of Taurine in dry eye models. J Ocular Pharmacol Ther 
34:188
92. Craig JP, Purslow C, Murphy PJ, Wolffsohn JSW (2010) 
Effect of a liposomal spray on the pre-ocular tear film. 
Cont Lens Anterior Eye 33(2):83–87
93. Craig J, Purslow C, Murphy P, Wolffsohn J (2010) Effect 
of a liposomal spray on the pre-ocular tear film. Contact 
Lens Anterior Eye J Br Contact Lens Assoc 33:83–87
94. Pult H, Gill F, Riede-Pult B (2012) Effect of three dif￾ferent liposomal eye sprays on ocular comfort and tear 
film. Contact Lens Anterior Eye J Br Contact Lens Assoc 
35:203–207
95. Hueck A, Wehrmann R (2017) Comparison of the clini￾cal efficacy of four different liposomal sprays for the 
treatment of dry eye. Open J Ophthalmol 7:103–116
96. Pult H, Khatum F, Travé Huarte S, Wolffsohn J (2021) 
Effect of eye spray phospholipid concentration on the 
tear film and ocular comfort. Eye Contact Lens Sci Clin 
Pract 47:445–448
97. Acar D, Molina-Martínez I, Gómez-Ballesteros M, 
Guzmán-Navarro M, Benítez-del-Castillo J, Herrero￾Vanrell R (2017) Novel liposome-based and in situ gel￾ling artificial tear formulation for dry eye disease treat￾ment. Contact Lens Anterior Eye. 41:93–98
98. Frampton JE (2022) Varenicline solution nasal spray: a 
review in dry eye disease. Drugs 82(14):1481–1488
99. Wirta D, Vollmer P, Paauw J, Chiu KH, Henry E, Strif￾fler K et al (2022) Efficacy and safety of OC-01 (vareni￾cline solution) nasal spray on signs and symptoms of 
dry eye disease: the ONSET-2 phase 3 randomized trial. 
Ophthalmology 129(4):379–387
100. Quiroz-Mercado H, Hernandez-Quintela E, Chiu KH, 
Henry E, Nau JA (2022) A phase II randomized trial to 
evaluate the long-term (12-week) efficacy and safety of 
OC-01 (varenicline solution) nasal spray for dry eye dis￾ease: The MYSTIC study. Ocul Surf 24:15–21
101. Torkildsen GL, Pattar GR, Jerkins G, Striffler K, Nau 
J (2022) Efficacy and safety of single-dose OC-02 
(Simpinicline Solution) nasal spray on signs and symp￾toms of dry eye disease: the PEARL Phase II randomized 
trial. Clin Ther 44(9):1178–1186
102. López-García JS, García-Lozano I, Rivas L, Ramírez N, 
Méndez MT, Raposo R (2016) Stability of growth factors 
in autologous serum eyedrops after long-term storage. 
Curr Eye Res 41(3):292–298
103. Noble BA, Loh R, Maclennan S, Pesudovs K, Reynolds 
A, Bridges LR et  al (2004) Comparison of autologous 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 20 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
serum eye drops with conventional therapy in a ran￾domised controlled crossover trial for ocular surface dis￾ease. Br J Ophthalmol 88:647–652
104. Van der Meer P, Verbakel S, Honohan Á, Lorinser J, 
Thurlings R, Jacobs J et al (2021) Allogeneic and autolo￾gous serum eye drops: a pilot double-blind randomized 
crossover trial. Acta Ophthalmol 99:837–842
105. Higuchi A (2018) Autologous serum and serum 
components. Investigative Ophthalmol V Sci 
;59(14):DES121-DES9.
106. Lagnado R, King A, Donald F, Dua H (2004) A protocol 
for low contamination risk of autologous serum drops in 
the management of ocular surface disorders. Br J Oph￾thalmol 88:464–465
107. Wang L, Cao K, Wei Z, Baudouin C, Labbé A, Liang Q 
(2019) Autologous serum eye drops versus artificial tear 
drops for dry eye disease: a systematic review and meta￾analysis of randomized controlled trials. Ophthalmic Res 
63:443–451
108. Anitua E, Fuente M, Muruzabal F, Riestra A, Merayo￾Lloves J, Orive G (2015) Plasma rich in growth factors 
(PRGF) eye drops stimulates scarless regeneration com￾pared to autologous serum in the ocular surface stromal 
fibroblasts. Exp Eye Res 135:118–126
109. Metheetrairut C, Ngowyutagon P, Tunganuntarat A, 
Khowawisetsut L, Kittisares K, Prabhasawat P (2022) 
Comparison of epitheliotrophic factors in platelet-rich 
plasma versus autologous serum and their treatment effi￾cacy in dry eye disease. Sci Rep 12(1):8906
110. Ribeiro M, Melo V, Barbosa M, Tozzi M, Ramos M, 
Gaia N, et  al (2017) The use of platelet rich-plasma in 
Ophthalmology: a literature review. Revista Brasileira de 
Oftalmologia;76
111. García-Conca V, Abad-Collado M, Hueso-Abancens J, 
Mengual-Verdú E, Pinero D, Aguirre-Balsalobre F et al 
(2018) Efficacy and safety of treatment of hyposecre￾tory dry eye with platelet-rich plasma. Acta Ophthalmol 
97:e170–e178
112. Sanchez-Avila R, Merayo-Lloves J, Riestra A, Anitua 
E, Muruzabal F, Orive G et  al (2017) The effect of 
immunologically safe plasma rich in growth factor 
eye drops in patients with Sjögren syndrome. J Ocular 
Pharmacol Ther Off J Assoc Ocular Pharmacol Ther 
33:391–399
113. Rodriguez A, Gisbert S, Palazón A, Alió J (2020) 
Quantification of growth factors and Fibronectin in 
diverse preparations of platelet-rich plasma for the 
treatment of ocular surface disorders (E-PRP). Transl 
Vis Sci Technol 9:22
114. Steller D, Herbst N, Pries R, Juhl D, Hakim S (2018) 
Impact of incubation method on the release of growth 
factors in Non-Ca2+-activated PRP, Ca2+-activated 
PRP, PRF and A-PRF. J Cranio-Maxillofac Surg 
47:365–372
115. Mohammed MA, Allam IY, Shaheen MS, Lazreg S, 
Doheim MF (2022) Lacrimal gland injection of platelet 
rich plasma for treatment of severe dry eye: a compara￾tive clinical study. BMC Ophthalmol 22(1):343
116. Anitua E (1999) Plasma rich in growth factors: prelimi￾nary results of use in the preparation of future sites for 
implants. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 14(4):529–535
117. López-Plandolit S, Morales MC, Freire V, Grau 
AE, Durán JA (2011) Efficacy of plasma rich in 
growth factors for the treatment of dry eye. Cornea 
30(12):1312–1317
118. Gea-Navarrete S, Montero-Hernández M, Gallego-Lago 
I, Santiuste-Román A, Montesinos-Ortí S, Soler-Com￾pany E (2021) Resultados en salud y aspectos farmaco￾económicos del tratamiendo con PRGF-Endoret en ojo 
seco. Revista de la OFIL 31:357–360
119. Sanchez-Avila RM, Merayo-Lloves J, Fernandez ML, 
Rodriguez-Gutierrez LA, Jurado N, Muruzabal F et  al 
(2018) Plasma rich in growth factors for the treat￾ment of dry eye after LASIK surgery. Ophthalmic Res 
60(2):80–86
120. Fea AM, Aragno V, Testa V, Machetta F, Parisi S, 
D’Antico S et al (2016) The effect of autologous platelet 
lysate eye drops: an in vivo confocal microscopy study. 
Biomed Res Int 2016:8406832
121. Anitua E, Muruzabal F, Tayebba A, Riestra A, Perez 
VL, Merayo-Lloves J et  al (2015) Autologous serum 
and plasma rich in growth factors in ophthalmol￾ogy: preclinical and clinical studies. Acta Ophthalmol 
93(8):e605–e614
122. Pezzotta S, Del Fante C, Scudeller L, Rossi GC, Perotti 
C, Bianchi PE et al (2017) Long-term safety and efficacy 
of autologous platelet lysate drops for treatment of ocular 
GvHD. Bone Marrow Transpl 52(1):101–106
123. Giannaccare G, Carnevali A, Senni C, Logozzo L, Scor￾cia V (2020) Umbilical cord blood and serum for the 
treatment of ocular diseases: a comprehensive review. 
Ophthalmol Therapy 9:235–248
124. Versura P, Profazio V, Buzzi M, Stancari A, Arpinati M, 
Malavolta N, Campos EC (2012) Efficacy of standard￾ized and quality-controlled cord blood serum eye drop 
therapy in the healing of severe corneal epithelial dam￾age in dry eye. Cornea 32:412–418
125. Yoon KC, Jeong IY, Im S-S, Park YG, Kim HJ, Choi J 
(2007) Therapeutic effect of umbilical cord serum eye￾drops for the treatment of dry eye associated with graft￾versus-host disease. Bone Marrow Transpl 39:231–235
126. Yoon KC, Heo H, Im S-K, You I-C, Kim Y-H, Park Y-G 
(2007) Comparison of autologous serum and umbilical 
cord serum eye drops for dry eye syndrome. Am J Oph￾thalmol 144:86–92
127. Yoon KC (2014) Use of umbilical cord serum in ophthal￾mology. Chonnam Med J 50(3):82–85
128. Higuchi A, Ueno R, Shimmura S, Suematsu M, Dogru 
M, Tsubota K (2007) Albumin rescues ocular epithelial 
cells from cell death in dry eye. Curr Eye Res 32:83–88
129. Shimmura S, Ueno R, Matsumoto Y, Goto E, Higuchi 
A, Shimazaki J et  al (2003) Albumin as a tear supple￾ment in the treatment of severe dry eye. Br J Ophthalmol 
87:1279–1283
130. Schargus M, Kohlhaas M, Unterlauft J (2015) Treat￾ment of severe ocular surface disorders with albumin 
eye drops. J Ocular Pharmacol Ther Off J Assoc Ocular 
Pharmacol Ther 31:291–295
131. Lambiase A, Sacchetti M, Bonini S (2012) Nerve growth 
factor therapy for corneal disease. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 
23(4):296–302
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 Page 21 of 24 49
Vol.: (0123456789)
132. Ferrari MP, Mantelli F, Sacchetti M, Antonangeli MI, 
Cattani F, D’Anniballe G et  al (2014) Safety and phar￾macokinetics of escalating doses of human recombinant 
nerve growth factor eye drops in a double-masked, ran￾domized clinical trial. BioDrugs Clin Immunother Biop￾harm Gene Therapy 28(3):275–283
133. Sacchetti M, Lambiase A, Schmidl D, Schmetterer L, 
Ferrari M, Mantelli F et al (2020) Effect of recombinant 
human nerve growth factor eye drops in patients with dry 
eye: a phase IIa, open label, multiple-dose study. Br J 
Ophthalmol 104(1):127–135
134. Bonini S, Lambiase A, Rama P, Filatori I, Allegretti M, 
Chao W et al (2018) Phase I trial of recombinant human 
nerve growth factor for neurotrophic keratitis. Ophthal￾mology 125(9):1468–1471
135. Bonini S, Lambiase A, Rama P, Sinigaglia F, Allegretti 
M, Chao W et  al (2018) Phase II randomized, double￾masked, vehicle-controlled trial of recombinant human 
nerve growth factor for neurotrophic keratitis. Ophthal￾mology 125(9):1332–1343
136. Jirsova K, Jones GLA (2017) Amniotic membrane in 
ophthalmology: properties, preparation, storage and 
indications for grafting-a review. Cell Tissue Banking 
18(2):193–204
137. Yeu E, Goldberg DF, Mah FS, Beckman KA, Luchs JI, 
Solomon JD et al (2019) Safety and efficacy of amniotic 
cytokine extract in the treatment of dry eye disease. Clin 
Ophthalmol (Auckland, NZ) 13:887–894
138. Liang L, Li W, Ling S, Sheha H, Qiu W, Li C et al (2009) 
Amniotic membrane extraction solution for ocular chem￾ical burns. Clin Exp Ophthalmol 37(9):855–863
139. Shayan Asl N, Nejat F, Mohammadi P, Nekoukar A, 
Hesam S, Ebrahimi M et al (2019) Amniotic membrane 
extract eye drop promotes limbal stem cell proliferation 
and corneal epithelium healing. Cell J 20(4):459–468
140. Murri MS, Moshirfar M, Birdsong OC, Ronquillo YC, 
Ding Y, Hoopes PC (2018) Amniotic membrane extract 
and eye drops: a review of literature and clinical applica￾tion. Clin Ophthalmol (Auckland, NZ) 12:1105–1112
141. Pérez ML, Barreales S, Sabater-Cruz N, Martinez￾Conesa EM, Vilarrodona A, Casaroli-Marano RP (2022) 
Amniotic membrane extract eye drops: a new approach 
to severe ocular surface pathologies. Cell Tissue Banking 
23(3):473–481
142. Ryu K, Kim S, Kim MK, Paik H, Kim DH (2021) Short￾term therapeutic effects of topical corticosteroids on 
refractory dry eye disease: clinical usefulness of matrix 
metalloproteinase 9 testing as a response prediction 
marker. Clin Ophthalmol 15:759–767
143. Kallab M, Szegedi S, Hommer N, Stegmann H, Kaya S, 
Werkmeister R et  al (2019) Topical low dose preserva￾tive-free hydrocortisone reduces signs and symptoms in 
patients with chronic dry eye: a randomized clinical trial. 
Adv Ther 37:1–13
144. Leibowitz H, Kupferman A (1974) Anti-inflammatory 
effectiveness in the cornea of topically administered 
prednisolone. Invest Ophthalmol 13:757–763
145. Lee H, Ryu I, Seo KY, Hong S, Kim H, Kim E (2006) 
Topical 0.1% prednisolone lowers nerve growth factor 
expression in keratoconjunctivitis sicca patients. Oph￾thalmology 113:198–205
146. Cutolo CA, Barabino S, Bonzano C, Traverso C (2017) 
The use of topical corticosteroids for treatment of dry eye 
syndrome. Ocul Immunol Inflamm 27:1–10
147. Jonisch J, Steiner A, Udell I (2010) Preservative-free 
low-dose dexamethasone for the treatment of chronic 
ocular surface disease refractory to standard therapy. 
Cornea 29:723–726
148. Patane M, Cohen A, From S, Torkildsen G, Welch D, 
Ousler G (2011) Ocular iontophoresis of EGP-437 (dex￾amethasone phosphate) in dry eye patients: results of a 
randomized clinical trial. Clin Ophthalmol (Auckland, 
NZ) 5:633–643
149. Eadie S, Thompson M (1955) Kerato-conjunctivitis sicca 
treated with Cortisone and ACTH. Br J Ophthalmol 
39:90–97
150. Beckman K, Katz J, Majmudar P, Rostov A (2020) 
Loteprednol etabonate for the treatment of dry eye dis￾ease: a literature review. J Ocular Pharmacol Ther 
36:497–511
151. Jung H, Ji Y, Sung M, Kim K, Yoon KC (2015) Long￾term outcome of treatment with topical corticosteroids 
for severe dry eye associated with sjögren’s syndrome. 
Chonnam Med J 51:26–32
152. Aragona P, Spinella R, Rania L, Postorino E, Sommario 
M, Roszkowska A, et  al. Safety and efficacy of 0.1% 
clobetasone butyrate eyedrops in the treatment of dry eye 
in Sjogren syndrome. European journal of ophthalmol￾ogy. 2012;23:0.
153. Ambroziak AM, Szaflik J, Szaflik JP, Ambroziak M, 
Witkiewicz J, Skopiński P (2016) Immunomodulation 
on the ocular surface: a review. Central-Eur J Immunol 
41(2):195–208
154. Jones L, Downie LE, Korb D, Benitez-Del-Castillo JM, 
Dana R, Deng SX et al (2017) TFOS DEWS II manage￾ment and therapy report. Ocul Surf 15(3):575–628
155. de Oliveira RC, Wilson SE (2019) Practical guidance 
for the use of cyclosporine ophthalmic solutions in 
the management of dry eye disease. Clin Ophthalmol 
(Auckland, NZ) 13:1115–1122
156. Li Y, Johnson N, Capano M, Edwards M, Crompton M 
(2004) Cyclophilin-D promotes the mitochondrial per￾meability transition but has opposite effects on apopto￾sis and necrosis. Biochem J 383(Pt 1):101–109
157. Kanellopoulos AJ (2019) Incidence and management 
of symptomatic dry eye related to LASIK for myopia, 
with topical cyclosporine A. Clin Ophthalmol (Auck￾land, NZ) 13:545–552
158. Lee JH, Song IS, Kim KL, Yoon SY (2016) Effective￾ness and optical quality of topical 3.0% diquafosol ver￾sus 0.05% cyclosporine a in dry eye patients following 
cataract surgery. J oPhthalmol:8150757
159. Iaccheri B, Torroni G, Cagini C, Fiore T, Cerquaglia A, 
Lupidi M et  al (2017) Corneal confocal scanning laser 
microscopy in patients with dry eye disease treated with 
topical cyclosporine. Eye (Lond) 31(5):788–794
160. Sall K, Stevenson OD, Mundorf TK, Reis BL (2000) 
Two multicenter, randomized studies of the efficacy and 
safety of cyclosporine ophthalmic emulsion in moderate 
to severe dry eye disease. CsA phase 3 study group. Oph￾thalmology 107(4):631–639
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 22 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
161. Stonecipher KG, Torkildsen GL, OuslerMorris GWS, 
Villanueva L, Hollander DA (2016) The IMPACT study: 
a prospective evaluation of the effects of cyclosporine 
ophthalmic emulsion 0.05% on ocular surface staining 
and visual performance in patients with dry eye. Clin 
Ophthalmol (Auckland, NZ). 10:887–895
162. Goldberg DF, Malhotra RP, Schechter BA, Justice A, 
Weiss SL, Sheppard JD (2019) A phase 3, randomized, 
double-masked study of OTX-101 ophthalmic solution 
0.09% in the treatment of dry eye disease. Ophthalmol￾ogy 126(9):1230–1237
163. Malhotra R, Devries DK, Luchs J, Kabat A, Schechter 
BA, Shen Lee B et al (2019) Effect of OTX-101, a novel 
nanomicellar formulation of cyclosporine A, on corneal 
staining in patients with keratoconjunctivitis sicca: a 
pooled analysis of phase 2b/3 and phase 3 studies. Cor￾nea 38(10):1259–1265
164. Weiss SL, Kramer WG (2019) Ocular distribution of 
cyclosporine following topical administration of OTX-
101 in New Zealand white rabbits. J Ocular Pharmacol 
Ther Off J Assoc Ocular Pharmacol Ther 35(7):395–402
165. Mandal A, Gote V, Pal D, Ogundele A, Mitra AK 
(2019) Ocular pharmacokinetics of a topical ophthalmic 
nanomicellar solution of cyclosporine (Cequa®) for dry 
eye disease. Pharm Res 36(2):36
166. Hoy SM (2017) Ciclosporin ophthalmic emul￾sion 0.1%: a review in severe dry eye disease. Drugs 
77(17):1909–1916
167. Leonardi A, Van Setten G, Amrane M, Ismail D, Garri￾gue JS, Figueiredo FC et al (2016) Efficacy and safety of 
0.1% cyclosporine A cationic emulsion in the treatment 
of severe dry eye disease: a multicenter randomized trial. 
Eur J Ophthalmol 26(4):287–296
168. Gire AI, Karakus S, Ingrodi SM, Akpek EK (2016) Fre￾quent dosing of topical cyclosporine a for severe ocular 
surface disease. J Ocular Pharmacol Ther Off J Assoc 
Ocular Pharmacol Ther 32(3):150–154
169. Stevenson D, Tauber J, Reis BL (2000) Efficacy and 
safety of cyclosporin A ophthalmic emulsion in the treat￾ment of moderate-to-severe dry eye disease: a dose-rang￾ing, randomized trial. The cyclosporin A phase 2 study 
group. Ophthalmology 107(5):967–974
170. Stonecipher K, Perry HD, Gross RH, Kerney DL (2005) 
The impact of topical cyclosporine A emulsion 0.05% on 
the outcomes of patients with keratoconjunctivitis sicca. 
Curr Med Res Opin 21(7):1057–1063
171. Sheppard JD, Donnenfeld ED, Holland EJ, Slonim CB, 
Solomon R, Solomon KD et  al (2014) Effect of lotep￾rednol etabonate 05% on initiation of dry eye treatment 
with topical cyclosporine 0.05%. Eye Contact Lens 
40(5):289–296
172. Singla S, Sarkar L, Joshi M (2019) Comparison of topi￾cal cyclosporine alone and topical loteprednol with 
cyclosporine in moderate dry eye in Indian population: a 
prospective study. Taiwan J Ophthalmol 9(3):173–178
173. Rao SN (2011) Reversibility of dry eye deceleration 
after topical cyclosporine 0.05% withdrawal. J Ocular 
Pharmacol Ther Off J Assoc Ocular Pharmacol Ther 
27(6):603–609
174. Rey I, Barcia M, García Quintanilla L, Castro-Balado A, 
Busto-Iglesias M, Zarra-Ferro I et  al (2021) 4CPS-323 
Evaluation of the use, adherence and tolerance of 0.03% 
tacrolimus eye drops. Eur J Hosp Pharm 28:A762
175. Barbarino JM, Staatz CE, Venkataramanan R, Klein 
TE, Altman RB (2013) PharmGKB summary: cyclo￾sporine and tacrolimus pathways. Pharmacogenet Genom 
23(10):563–585
176. Yazu H, Shimizu E, Aketa N, Dogru M, Okada N, Fuka￾gawa K et al (2019) The efficacy of 0.1% tacrolimus oph￾thalmic suspension in the treatment of severe atopic kera￾toconjunctivitis. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol Off Publ 
Am Coll Allergy Asthma Immunol 122(4):387–92.e1
177. Moawad P, Shamma R, Hassanein D, Ragab G, El 
Zawahry O (2022) Evaluation of the effect of topical 
tacrolimus 0.03% versus cyclosporine 0.05% in the treat￾ment of dry eye secondary to Sjogren syndrome. Eur J 
Ophthalmol 32(1):673–679
178. Moscovici BK, Holzchuh R, Chiacchio BB, Santo 
RM, Shimazaki J, Hida RY (2012) Clinical treatment 
of dry eye using 0.03% tacrolimus eye drops. Cornea 
31(8):945–949
179. Moscovici BK, Holzchuh R, Sakassegawa-Naves FE, 
Hoshino-Ruiz DR, Albers MB, Santo RM et  al (2015) 
Treatment of Sjögren’s syndrome dry eye using 0.03% 
tacrolimus eye drop: prospective double-blind rand￾omized study. Contact Lens Anterior Eye J Br Contact 
Lens Assoc 38(5):373–378
180. Holland EJ, Luchs J, Karpecki PM, Nichols KK, Jackson 
MA, Sall K et al (2017) Lifitegrast for the treatment of 
dry eye disease: results of a phase III, randomized, dou￾ble-masked, placebo-controlled trial (OPUS-3). Ophthal￾mology 124(1):53–60
181. Perez VL, Pflugfelder SC, Zhang S, Shojaei A, Haque R 
(2016) Lifitegrast, a novel integrin antagonist for treat￾ment of dry eye disease. Ocul Surf 14(2):207–215
182. Schmidt S, Moser M, Sperandio M (2013) The molecular 
basis of leukocyte recruitment and its deficiencies. Mol 
Immunol 55(1):49–58
183. Li JX, Tsai YY, Lai CT, Li YL, Wu YH, Chiang CC 
(2022) Lifitegrast ophthalmic solution 5% is a safe and 
efficient eyedrop for dry eye disease: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. J Clin Med 11(17):5014
184. Donnenfeld ED, Karpecki PM, Majmudar PA, Nich￾ols KK, Raychaudhuri A, Roy M et al (2016) Safety of 
lifitegrast ophthalmic solution 5.0% in patients with dry 
eye disease: a 1-year, multicenter, randomized. Placebo￾Controlled Study. Cornea. 35(6):741–748
185. Wilson DJ, Schutte SM, Abel SR (2015) Comparing the 
efficacy of ophthalmic NSAIDs in common indications: 
a literature review to support cost-effective prescribing. 
Ann Pharmacother 49(6):727–734
186. Liu X, Wang S, Kao AA, Long Q (2012) The effect of 
topical pranoprofen 0.1% on the clinical evaluation and 
conjunctival HLA-DR expression in dry eyes. Cornea 
31(11):1235–1239
187. Bai R, Liu L-p, Chen Z, Ma Q (2022) Cyclosporine 
(0.05%) combined with Diclofenac sodium eye drops for 
the treatment of dry eye disease. J Ophthalmol :2334077
188. Kawahara A, Utsunomiya T, Kato Y, Takayanagi Y 
(2016) Comparison of effect of nepafenac and diclofenac 
ophthalmic solutions on cornea, tear film, and ocular 
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 Page 23 of 24 49
Vol.: (0123456789)
surface after cataract surgery: the results of a randomized 
trial. Clin Ophthalmol (Auckland, NZ) 10:385–391
189. Yanai K, Huang J, Kadonosono K, Uchio E (2013) Cor￾neal sensitivity after topical bromfenac sodium eye-drop 
instillation. Clin Ophthalmol (Auckland, NZ) 7:741–744
190. Hayasaka Y, Hayasaka S, Zhang XY, Nagaki Y (2003) 
Effects of topical corticosteroids and nonsteroidal anti￾inflammatory drugs on prostaglandin e2-induced aque￾ous flare elevation in pigmented rabbits. Ophthalmic Res 
35(6):341–344
191. Bai R, Liu LP, Chen Z, Ma Q (2022) Cyclosporine 
(0.05%) Combined with Diclofenac sodium eye drops for 
the treatment of dry eye disease. J Ophthalmol: 2334077.
192. Coursey TG, de Paiva CS (2014) Managing Sjögren’s 
Syndrome and non-Sjögren syndrome dry eye with anti￾inflammatory therapy. Clin Ophthalmol (Auckland, NZ) 
8:1447–1458
193. Singer DD, Kennedy J, Wittpenn JR (2015) Topi￾cal NSAIDs effect on corneal sensitivity. Cornea 
34(5):541–543
194. Aragona P, Stilo A, Ferreri F, Mobrici M (2005) Effects 
of the topical treatment with NSAIDs on corneal sensi￾tivity and ocular surface of Sjögren’s syndrome patients. 
Eye (Lond) 19(5):535–539
195. Maayan C, Heyman SN (2018) Dry eye. N Engl J Med 
379(11):e19
196. Garrigue JS, Amrane M, Faure MO, Holopainen JM, 
Tong L (2017) Relevance of lipid-based products in the 
management of dry eye disease. J Ocular Pharmacol 
Ther Off J Assoc Ocular Pharmacol Ther 33(9):647–661
197. Liu A, Ji J (2014) Omega-3 essential fatty acids therapy 
for dry eye syndrome: a meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled studies. Med Sci Monit Int Med J Exp Clin 
Res 20:1583–1589
198. Downie LE, Ng SM, Lindsley KB, Akpek EK. (2019) 
Omega‐3 and omega‐6 polyunsaturated fatty acids for 
dry eye disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. (12):
199. Ton J, Korownyk C (2018) Omega-3 supplements for 
dry eye. Can Fam Phys Medecin de famille canadien 
64(11):826
200. Jacobi C, Angstmann-Mehr S, Lange A, Kaercher T 
(2022) A water-free omega-3 fatty acid eye drop formu￾lation for the treatment of evaporative dry eye disease: a 
prospective, multicenter noninterventional study. J Ocu￾lar Pharmacol Ther Off J Assoc Ocular Pharmacol Ther 
38(5):348–353
201. Keating GM (2015) Diquafosol ophthalmic solution 3 %: 
a review of its use in dry eye. Drugs 75(8):911–922
202. Baek J, Doh SH, Chung SK (2016) The effect of topical 
diquafosol tetrasodium 3% on dry eye after cataract sur￾gery. Curr Eye Res 41(10):1281–1285
203. Jeon HS, Hyon JY (2016) The efficacy of diquafosol 
ophthalmic solution in Non-Sjögren and Sjögren syn￾drome dry eye patients unresponsive to artificial tear. J 
Ocular Pharmacol Ther Off J Assoc Ocular Pharmacol 
Ther 32(7):463–468
204. Matsumoto Y, Ohashi Y, Watanabe H, Tsubota K (2012) 
Efficacy and safety of diquafosol ophthalmic solution in 
patients with dry eye syndrome: a Japanese phase 2 clini￾cal trial. Ophthalmology 119(10):1954–1960
205. Takamura E, Tsubota K, Watanabe H, Ohashi Y (2012) A 
randomised, double-masked comparison study of diqua￾fosol versus sodium hyaluronate ophthalmic solutions in 
dry eye patients. Br J Ophthalmol 96(10):1310–1315
206. Ogami T, Asano H, Hiraoka T, Yamada Y, Oshika T 
(2021) The effect of diquafosol ophthalmic solution on 
clinical parameters and visual function in soft contact 
lens-related dry eye. Adv Ther 38(11):5534–5547
207. Inoue Y, Ochi S (2017) Effects of 3% diquafosol sodium 
ophthalmic solution on higher-order aberrations in 
patients diagnosed with dry eye after cataract surgery. 
Clin Ophthalmol (Auckland, NZ) 11:87–93
208. Mun Y, Kwon J-W, Oh JY (2018) Therapeutic effects of 
3% diquafosol ophthalmic solution in patients with short 
tear film break-up time-type dry eye disease. BMC Oph￾thalmol 18(1):237
209. Uchino M, Yokoi N, Shimazaki J, Hori Y, Tsubota K, 
Eye OBOTJD, S, (2022) Adherence to eye drops usage in 
dry eye patients and reasons for non-compliance: a web￾based survey. J Clin Med 11(2):367
210. Hori Y, Oka K, Inai M (2022) Efficacy and safety of 
the long-acting diquafosol ophthalmic solution DE-
089C in patients with dry eye: a randomized, double￾masked, placebo-controlled phase 3 study. Adv Ther 
39(8):3654–3667
211. Kashima T, Itakura H, Akiyama H, Kishi S (2014) 
Rebamipide ophthalmic suspension for the treatment of 
dry eye syndrome: a critical appraisal. Clin Ophthalmol 
(Auckland, NZ) 8:1003–1010
212. Urashima H, Okamoto T, Takeji Y, Shinohara H, Fuji￾sawa S (2004) Rebamipide increases the amount of 
mucin-like substances on the conjunctiva and cornea 
in the N-acetylcysteine-treated in  vivo model. Cornea 
23(6):613–619
213. Ueta M, Sotozono C, Yokoi N, Kinoshita S (2013) 
Rebamipide suppresses PolyI:C-stimulated cytokine pro￾duction in human conjunctival epithelial cells. J Ocular 
Pharmacol Ther Off J Assoc Ocular Pharmacol Ther 
29(7):688–693
214. Shrivastava S, Patkar P, Ramakrishnan R, Kanhere M, 
Riaz Z (2018) Efficacy of rebamipide 2% ophthalmic 
solution in the treatment of dry eyes. Oman J Ophthalmol 
11(3):207–212
215. Ueda K, Matsumiya W, Otsuka K, Maeda Y, Nagai T, 
Nakamura M (2015) Effectiveness and relevant factors of 
2 % rebamipide ophthalmic suspension treatment in dry 
eye. BMC Ophthalmol 15(1):58
216. Kinoshita S, Awamura S, Oshiden K, Nakamichi N, 
Suzuki H, Yokoi N (2012) Rebamipide (OPC-12759) in 
the treatment of dry eye: a randomized, double-masked, 
multicenter, placebo-controlled phase II study. Ophthal￾mology 119(12):2471–2478
217. Kinoshita S, Oshiden K, Awamura S, Suzuki H, Nakam￾ichi N, Yokoi N (2013) A randomized, multicenter phase 
3 study comparing 2% rebamipide (OPC-12759) with 
0.1% sodium hyaluronate in the treatment of dry eye. 
Ophthalmology 120(6):1158–1165
218. Kim EC, Choi JS, Joo CK (2009) A comparison of vita￾min a and cyclosporine a 0.05% eye drops for treatment 
of dry eye syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol 147(2):206–13.
e3
Int Ophthalmol (2024) 44:49 49 Page 24 of 24
Vol:. (1234567890)
219. Toshida H, Funaki T, Ono K, Tabuchi N, Watanabe S, 
Seki T et  al (2017) Efficacy and safety of retinol pal￾mitate ophthalmic solution in the treatment of dry eye: 
a Japanese Phase II clinical trial. Drug Des Dev Ther 
11:1871–1879
220. Fogagnolo P, DeCilla’ S, Alkabes M, Sabella P, Rossetti 
L (2021) A review of topical and systemic vitamin sup￾plementation in ocular surface diseases. Nutrients [Inter￾net]. 13(6):1998
221. Selek H, Unlü N, Orhan M, Irkeç M (2000) Evaluation of 
retinoic acid ophthalmic emulsion in dry eye. Eur J Oph￾thalmol 10(2):121–127
222. Cui X, Xiang J, Zhu W, Wei A, Le Q, Xu J et al (2016) 
Vitamin A palmitate and carbomer gel protects the con￾junctiva of patients with long-term prostaglandin analogs 
application. J Glaucoma 25(6):487–492
223. Soong HK, Martin NF, Wagoner MD, Alfonso E, Man￾delbaum SH, Laibson PR et  al (1988) Topical retinoid 
therapy for squamous metaplasia of various ocular 
surface disorders. A multicenter, placebo-controlled dou￾ble-masked study. Ophthalmology 95(10):1442–1446
224. Schmidt TA, Sullivan DA, Knop E, Richards SM, Knop 
N, Liu S et al (2013) Transcription, translation, and func￾tion of lubricin, a boundary lubricant, at the ocular sur￾face. JAMA Ophthalmol 131(6):766–776
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard 
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) 
holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing 
agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article 
is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement 
and applicable law.
