© 2023 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow
Study of dry eye syndrome: Focus on causative factors, treatment modalities, 
quality of life, and preservatives used in eye drops
Pratham M Raval, Harsh H Patel1
, Dipali M Purohit2
, Reema M Raval2
, Shikha V Sood1
Access this article online
Website:
www.ijo.in
DOI:
10.4103/IJO.IJO_3359_22
Quick Response Code:
Purpose: Dry eye syndrome (DES) is a global issue occurring due to tear deficiency or excessive tear 
evaporation. It is associated with a variety of symptoms causing ocular discomfort. The purpose of the study 
was to evaluate causative factors, treatment modalities, quality of life, and preservatives used in eye drops. 
Methods: This prospective, follow‑up study was conducted in the ophthalmology outpatient department 
of a tertiary care teaching hospital. Patients older than 18 years of age of either sex diagnosed with DES 
and willing to give written informed consent were included. The patients were subjected to the Ocular 
surface disease index Questionnaire (OSDI Questionnaire) twice; at the time of the first visit and at 15 days 
follow‑up. Results: A male preponderance was observed with a 1.86:1 male‑to‑female ratio. The mean age 
of the study population was 29.15 ± 10.07 years. The most common presenting complaints were symptoms 
related to dryness of the eyes followed by refractive error. Exposure to TV/computer screen for more than 
6 hours is the most common causative factor. There was a statistically significant improvement in overall 
quality of life (QoL) in patients of DES on treatment. However, no significant difference was seen in the 
improvement of quality of life in comparison with different preservatives used in prescribed eye drops for 
the treatment of DES. Conclusion: DES can adversely affect the quality of life of patients. Prompt treatment 
of this condition can significantly improve the patient’s QoL. Physicians should be encouraged to perform 
quality of life evaluations for patients with DES to guide them in treatment with more individual‑specific 
treatment options.
Key words: Causative factors for dry eye syndrome, dry eye syndrome, preservative use, quality of life
MBBS Student from Smt. NHL Municipal Medical College, 
Departments of 1
Pharmacology and 2
Ophthalmology, Smt. NHL 
Municipal Medical College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
Correspondence to: Dr. Shikha V Sood, Smt. NHL Municipal Medical 
College, Ellisbridge, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India. E‑mail: shikhavsood@
gmail.com
Received: 26‑Dec‑2022 Revision: 02‑Feb‑2023
Accepted: 13‑Feb‑2023 Published: 05-Apr-2023
Dry eye is a disorder of the tear film which occurs due to tear 
deficiency or excessive tear evaporation; it causes damage to the 
interpalpebral ocular surface and is associated with a variety of 
symptoms causing ocular discomfort. Dry eye syndrome (DES) 
is a common condition reported by patients who seek 
ophthalmologic care and is characterized by inflammation of 
the ocular surface and lacrimal glands.[1] Additionally, patients 
with dry eye are prone to potentially blinding infections, 
such as bacterial keratitis, and also at an increased risk of 
complications following common procedures such as laser 
refractive surgery.[1] The prevalence has been reported in many 
countries around the world, with a range between 9.5 and 
90%.[2] Its management is done in a stepwise manner. In step 
1, modification of the local environment and dietary changes 
along with lubricants are prescribed. If these measures are 
inadequate, in the second step 2, non‑preserved lubricants, 
tear conservation by punctal occlusion, and prescription of 
topical antibiotics or topical glucocorticoids can be done. If 
these measures are inadequate, in step 3, oral secretagogues, 
allogenic serum eye drops, and sclera contact lenses can be 
tried, and if the condition does not improve by these measures, 
in step 4, topical corticosteroids for a longer duration, amniotic 
membrane grafts, and surgical punctal occlusion can be tried.[3]
Its etiology includes aging, certain medical conditions like 
Sjogren’s syndrome, allergic eye disease, rheumatoid arthritis, 
lupus, scleroderma, graft vs. host disease, sarcoidosis, thyroid 
disorders, and vitamin A deficiency. Certain medicines and 
corneal nerve desensitivity caused by contact lens use, nerve 
damage, or laser eye surgery also cause DES.[1] It is learned that 
the use of certain preservatives in eye drop formulations can 
also be responsible for dry eye syndrome.[4]
World health organization (WHO) defines quality of 
life (QoL) as an individual’s perception of their position in life 
in the context of the culture and value systems in which they 
live and in relation to their goals, expectations, standards, and 
concerns.[5] Patients with dry eye experience various symptoms 
that can reduce their productivity and overall quality of 
life. For some patients, the severity of the condition and its 
chronicity leads to mood alterations and depression.[6] We 
intend to study the causative factors and treatment modalities 
of dry eye syndrome, to study the QoL of such patients, and 
to evaluate preservatives used in eye drops predisposing to 
dry eye syndrome.
Cite this article as: Raval PM, Patel HH, Purohit DM, Raval RM, Sood SV. 
Study of dry eye syndrome: Focus on causative factors, treatment modalities, 
quality of life, and preservatives used in eye drops. Indian J Ophthalmol 
2023;71:1587-92.
This is an open access journal, and articles are distributed under the terms of 
the Creative Commons Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 4.0 License, 
which allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially, 
as long as appropriate credit is given and the new creations are licensed under 
the identical terms.
For reprints contact: WKHLRPMedknow_reprints@wolterskluwer.com
Original Article
1588 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
16
9
1
1
4
2
2
2
0246810 12 14 16 18
Stabilised oxychloro complex
Benzalkonium chloride
Carbomer polymer c
Polyethylene glycol+ Propylene glycol
Polymixin B sulphate
Phenylmercuric N
D Panthenol
Sodium perborate
No. of patients
Figure 2: Preservatives present in prescribed treatment
Objectives
To study causative factors leading to dry eye syndrome, to 
observe the treatment modalities for dry eye syndrome in 
a tertiary care teaching hospital to measure QoL in patients 
with dry eye syndrome, evaluation of preservatives used in 
eye drops predisposing to dry eyes syndrome.
Methods
This study was carried out in the Ophthalmology department 
of a tertiary care teaching hospital. Data collection began 
after the approval of the Institutional Review Board. Those 
patients who were diagnosed as cases of DES, conforming 
to the inclusion criteria, were enrolled in the study. Written 
informed consent was taken from all the patients in their 
vernacular language. Data were collected for 8 weeks and 
were entered in the standard case record form. Details of drugs 
being used by the patients prior to complaints of dry eye were 
noted. Details of the treatment prescribed for DES in terms 
of brand name, generic name, dose, dosage form, frequency, 
and duration of treatment were also noted in the case record 
form. The preservatives present in these treatment modalities 
were also noted.
The severity of the dry eye in dry eye disease was 
assessed on the basis of the Dry Eye Workshop (DEWS) 
classification.[7] It was classified as severity levels 1, 2, 3 and 
4, where 1 suggested mild DES, 2 suggests moderate DES, 
3 suggests severe DES, and 4 suggests severe disabling 
DES. The quality‑of‑life assessment was done by the Ocular 
surface disease index Questionnaire (OSDI Questionnaire).[8]
Patients were subjected to the questionnaire twice; at the 
time of the first patient visit and at follow‑up after 15 days. 
The questionnaire had three subscales: ocular symptoms, 
vision‑related function, and environmental triggers. Patients 
rated their responses on a 0 to 4 scale with 0 corresponding to 
“none of the time” and 4 corresponding to “all of the time.” 
A final score was calculated which ranges from 0 to 100 with 
scores 0 to 12 representing normal QoL, 13 to 22 representing 
mildly affected QoL, 23 to 32 representing moderately affected 
QoL, and greater than 33 representing severely affected QoL. 
Evaluation of improvement in quality of life was done in 
comparison with OSDI questionnaire at the time of the first 
visit and at 15‑day follow‑up and post‑treatment. Patients 
of either sex, above the age of 18 years who have been 
diagnosed to be suffering from DES, and patients willing to 
give written informed consent were included in the study. 
Patients with psychiatric illness and patients with acute eye 
conditions (acute conjunctivitis, acute attack of angle closure 
glaucoma, episcleritis, scleritis, etc.) were excluded from the 
study.
Study design: A prospective, observational follow‑up 
study.
Sample size: Duration based.
Statistical analysis
Complete data were entered in Microsoft Excel 2019 and 
SPSS software (Statistical Package for Sciences) version 24 
(IBM Corporation, California). Paired t test and one‑way 
ANOVA were used. P value <0.05 was considered statistically 
significant. Pearson correlation test has also been used to check 
the correlation between age and severity of DES.
Results
A total of 40 patients fulfilling the inclusion and exclusion 
criteria were enrolled in the study.
Demographic characteristics of the study population
The mean age of the study population was 29.15 ± 10.07 years. 
The young population in the age range of 26–35 years was most 
affected by DES followed by the 16–25 years age range. Fig. 1.
Males had greater preponderance to DES, with male to 
female ratio of 1.86:1. Occupational profile of patients included 
business (n = 3), service (n = 17), farming (n = 2), student (n = 11), 
housewife (n = 5), and factory worker(n = 2). A higher incidence 
of DES was seen in patients with service (n = 17), followed by 
students (n = 11).
Severity of dryness of eyes in the study population
The severity of DES was classified on the basis of Dry Eye 
Workshop (DEWS) classification into mild, moderate, and 
severe which was seen in 20%, 42%, and 38% of patients, 
respectively.
Age and severity of DES correlation
Pearson correlation test was used to check the correlation 
between age and severity of DES. The value was found to be 
0.07 suggesting a very weak correlation.
Comorbidities
There were only two patients with comorbidities; diabetes plus 
hypertension (1 patient) and rheumatoid arthritis (1 patient).
Presenting complaints
The different presenting complaints were symptoms related 
to dryness of the eyes which included a stinging or burning 
16
18
2 3
1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
18-25 26-35 36-45 46-55 56-65
Age groups (years)
Age distribution in study population (n = 40)
Figure 1: Age distribution of study population Presrvatives No. of patients
April 2023 1589 Raval, et al.: Treatment modalities, QoL, causative factors and preservatives used in dry eye syndrome
sensation in the eyes, a foreign body sensation, sensitivity to 
light, redness of the eyes, etc., (20 patients). Complaints related 
to refractive error (15 patients), glaucoma (2 patients), and 
cataract (2 patients) were also noted. One patient had both 
glaucoma and complaints related to symptoms of dryness. 
Most patients presented with complaints related to symptoms 
of dryness of the eye followed by refractive error.
Quality of life (QoL) scores in patients of des according to 
probable causative factors
Probable causative factors included exposure to TV/computer 
screens for more than 6 hours, exposure to fumes and dust, 
benzalkonium chloride, and rheumatoid arthritis. Among 
these, exposure to TV/computer screen was the most common 
causative factor seen in 22 patients. Mean OSDI scores for 
rheumatoid arthritis patient were the highest (21) followed by 
benzalkonium chloride (18.8 ± 9.28) and those having exposure 
to fumes and dust (18.5 ± 6.42) Table 1.
Treatment prescribed for DES to the study population
The disease‑specific drugs for DES prescribed to the study 
population included sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (0.5%), 
cyclosporine (0.09%), hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose (0.3%), 
sodium hyaluronate (0.1%), polymixin B (0.1%)+ phenyl 
mercuric nitrate (0.001%), loteprednol etabonate (0.5%), and 
chloramphenicol(0.5%). Among them, sodium hyaluronate was 
prescribed the most followed by hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose 
and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose. Patients prescribed single, 
two, and three disease‑specific medications were 42.55%, 25%, 
and 32.50%, respectively. The role of cyclosporin, polymixin 
B, and chloramphenicol was for the prevention of secondary 
bacterial infections and not as lubricants. Table 2.
Preservatives present in the prescribed treatment
Patients were prescribed different eye drops for treatment 
of DES which contained various preservatives. These 
preservatives were stabilized oxychloro complex (0.1%), 
benzalkonium chloride (0.01%), carbomer polymer c (0.3%), 
polyethylene glycol (0.4%)+ propylene glycol (0.3%), 
polymixin B sulfate (0.1%), phenylmercuric N (0.001%), D 
panthenol (5%), and sodium perborate (0.03%). Stabilized 
oxychloro complex was most common preservative followed 
by benzalkonium chloride. Eight patients were prescribed 
medications without preservative. Three patients were 
prescribed eye drops containing more than one preservative. 
Fig. 2.
Quality of life analysis
Quality of life analysis was done by the Ocular surface disease 
index Questionnaire (OSDI Questionnaire). Patients were 
subjected to OSDI questionnaire twice, at baseline and at 
follow‑up visit at 15 days. Mean OSDI score at baseline was 
14.35 ± 8, and after 15 days, it was 4.98 ± 4.2. Paired t test was 
used in comparison with baseline and after 15 days QoL scores 
and it was statistically significant (P < 0.001) Table 3.
Quality of life scores in relation to active ingredients present 
in eye drops
We compared the active treatment groups carboxymethyl 
cellulose, sodium hyaluronate, hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose, 
a combination of hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose + sodium 
hyaluronate, and a combination of hydroxypropyl methyl 
cellulose + carboxymethyl cellulose + sodium hyaluronate 
with the use of one‑way ANOVA to evaluate any significant 
differences between them for improvement of QoL. However, 
on comparing different active ingredients with each other, we 
did not find a statistically significant difference among them. 
The improvement in OSDI score was highest in patients taking 
carboxy methyl cellulose (mean OSDI = 10.42) and least for 
patients taking hydroxy propyl methyl cellulose (mean OSDI 
difference = 5.8).
Quality of life scores in relation to preservatives present in 
eye drops
The mean OSDI score difference between baseline and 
15 days follow‑up was highest with phenylmercuric N and 
D panthenol (score difference of 10) and least with carbomer 
polymer c. We applied one‑way ANOVA test to check 
significance of the difference in the improvement of QoL scores 
between individual preservative groups but did not find a 
statistically significant difference (P value <0.94) Table 3.
Mean OSDI scores in relation to the severity of dryness in 
DES patients
Mean OSDI baseline scores for mild, moderate, and severe 
dryness in patients of DES were 14.12 ± 11.73, 15.94 ± 6.73, 
and 12.67 ± 7.18, respectively. The difference between them 
was not significant.
Comparison of improvement in mean OSDI score in relation 
to the presence or absence of preservatives in eye drops used 
for the treatment of DES
Thirty‑two patients prescribed eye drops for the treatment 
of DES contained preservatives, and in eight patients, the 
prescribed eye drops did not contain any preservatives. 
A greater difference in pre‑ and post‑OSDI scores was seen in 
patients prescribed eye drops without preservatives, but the 
difference was not statistically significant as compared to those 
prescribed eye drops with preservatives.
Table 2: Treatment for DES prescribed to the study 
population
Treatment No. of 
patients
Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (0.5%) 13
Cyclosporine (0.09%) 9
Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (0.3%) 14
Sodium hyaluronate (0.1%) 20
Polymixin B (0.1%) + phenyl mercuric nitrate (0.001%) 2
Loteprednol etabonate (0.5%) 1
Chloramphenicol (0.5%) 3
Table 1: Probable causative factors for DES and mean 
OSDI scores
Causative factors No. of 
patients
Mean OSDI 
score
Exposure to TV/computer screen 22 11.81±6.11
Exposure to fumes and dust 4 18.5±6.42
Benzalkonium chloride 5 18.8±9.28
Rheumatoid arthritis 1 21
No causative factors 8 15.62±11.24
1590 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
OSDI scores in relation to individual domains in the OSDI 
questionnaire
The effects on individual domains in the OSDI questionnaire, 
namely, OSDI symptoms (Domain 1), OSDI function 
(Domain 2), and OSDI triggers (Domain 3) were evaluated 
based on the mean difference of OSDI scores in individual 
domains at baseline and at 15 days follow‑up. Domain 2 had 
more improvement in OSDI score (3.3) compared with Domain 
1 (2.92) and Domain 3 (3.15). However, the difference was not 
statistically significant (P = 0.64).
Discussion
In our literature search, we found the prevalence of DES in 
India to be 17.7%, however, that in western India was higher 
at 34.26%.[9,10] There were negligible studies in India evaluating 
causative factors, quality of life, and effects of active ingredients 
and preservatives used in eye drops on DES simultaneously, 
which prompted us to take up this study.
Patients with the greater preponderance of DES were 
in the 26–35 years of age group. The mean age of the study 
population was 29.15 ± 10.07 years. In our study, males had 
more preponderance to DES than females, with male to female 
ratio of 1.86:1. A study done by McCarty et al.
[11] found a higher 
prevalence among women. Another study suggested that 
the prevalence of DES increases with age and doubles after 
59 years of age.[12] However, we found a very weak correlation 
of age with DES (Pearson correlation coefficient = 0.07). One 
probable reason for this could be a small sample size. A study 
done by McCarty et al.
[11] suggested that the 21–40 years of age 
group is associated with more severe DES. This age range is 
comparable to our study. Another study was done by Schein 
et al.
[13] in 2520 patients found no association between age and 
sex with dry eye.
The occupational profile of study participants included 
business, service, farming, student, housewife, and factory 
workers. Patients who were in service had a higher incidence 
of DES (n = 17), followed by students (n = 11). One likely reason 
could be higher exposure to TV/computer screens in these 
patients. A study done in North India showed that patients 
involved in desk jobs involving computer use were more 
predisposed to develop DES,[14] which is in accordance with 
our study. There were only two patients with comorbidities 
like diabetes, hypertension, and rheumatoid arthritis in 
our study. The presenting complaints of patients who were 
diagnosed with DES included symptoms related to dryness 
of eyes (a stinging or burning sensation in eyes, a foreign 
body sensation, sensitivity to light, redness of the eyes, etc.), 
complaints related to refractive error, glaucoma, and cataract. 
Most patients presented with symptoms related to dryness of the 
eye (n = 21) followed by refractive error(n = 15). We assessed the 
severity of DES on the basis of the Dry Eye Workshop (DEWS) 
classification. Patients having mild, moderate, and severe DES 
were 20%, 42%, and 38%, respectively.
DES is a multifactorial disease with possible overlapping 
causes. In our study, probable causative factors included 
exposure to TV/computer screens for more than 6 hours daily, 
exposure to fumes and dust, benzalkonium chloride, and 
rheumatoid arthritis. Among these, exposure to TV/computer 
screens was the most common causative factor seen in 
22 patients, which was observed to be a common causative 
factor in a few other studies, too.[14] Mean OSDI score was 
more for benzalkonium chloride (with a mean OSDI score of 
18.8 ± 9.28) as a causative factor suggesting more severe DES 
in these patients. Other studies also suggest that benzalkonium 
chloride is an important causative factor for severe DES.[15]
The drugs prescribed to the study population with DES 
which was disease‑specific include sodium carboxymethyl 
cellulose, cyclosporine, hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose, 
sodium hyaluronate, polymixin B + phenyl mercuric nitrate, 
loteprednol etabonate, and chloramphenicol. Among them, 
sodium hyaluronate was prescribed the most followed by 
hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose and sodium carboxymethyl 
cellulose. Based on the number of disease‑specific medications 
prescribed for DES; 42.55% of patients were prescribed 
1 medication; 25% of patients were prescribed two medications 
and 32.50% of patients were prescribed three medications for 
the treatment of DES.
The eye drops prescribed for the treatment of DES contained 
different preservatives. The primary role of the preservative is 
to maintain the sterility of the eye drops. For this, they act as a 
detergent or by oxidative mechanisms or some other nonspecific 
antimicrobial mechanism. As the eye drops may be used for 
a considerable period of time some of these preservatives like 
benzalkonium chloride on repeated use may themselves be 
Table 3: Improvement in relation to individual preservatives present in eye drops used for the treatment of DES and 
overall improvement in QoL in patients with DES
Mean OSDI score Difference
1st visit (baseline) 2nd visit (follow‑up)
Stabilized oxychloro complex (0.1%) 14.38 5.13 9.25
Benzalkonium chloride (0.001%) 13.44 5.00 8.44
Carbomer polymer c (0.3%) 12 7 5.00
Polyethylene glycol (0.01%) + propylene glycol (0.3%) 19 10 9.00
Polymixin b sulfate (0.1%) 12.5 3.0 9.50
Phenylmercuric N (0.001%) 14.5 4.5 10.00
D panthenol (5%) 14.5 4.5 10.00
Sodium perborate (0.03%) 10.5 1.5 9.00
Overall improvement in QoL 14.35 4.98 9.37*
*Mean OSDI score difference with P<0.001 suggesting significant difference
April 2023 1591 Raval, et al.: Treatment modalities, QoL, causative factors and preservatives used in dry eye syndrome
responsible for causing damage to the ocular surface.[4] Studies 
have reported a better outcome with the use of preservative‑free 
eye drops as compared to preservative‑containing eye drops.[15]
Common preservatives used in our study were stabilized 
oxychloro complex, benzalkonium chloride, carbomer polymer 
c, polyethylene glycol + propylene glycol, polymixin B sulfate, 
phenylmercuric N, D panthenol, and sodium perborate. 
Among these, stabilized oxychloro complex was the most 
common preservative followed by benzalkonium chloride. 
Benzalkonium chloride is a commonly used preservative in 
eye drops. This is in accordance with other studies.[4,15]
In this study, quality of life analysis was done by Ocular 
surface disease index Questionnaire (OSDI Questionnaire), 
where patients were subjected to the OSDI questionnaire 
twice, at baseline and at follow‑up visits at 15 days. We used 
the paired t test to compare the scores at baseline and after 
15 days. Mean OSDI score at baseline was 14.35 ± 8 and after 
15 days it was 4.98 ± 4.2 (P value <0.001), which implies that 
there was statistically significant improvement after follow‑up. 
A study done by Lopes et al.
[16] also showed improvement in 
OSDI scores after the substitution of benzalkonium chloride 
preserved prostaglandin eye drops by a preservative‑free 
prostaglandin analog. Another study done by Mateo‐Otobia 
et al.
[17] also showed that preservative‑free eye drop formulation 
containing sodium hyaluronate and trehalose has a better OSDI 
score compared to eye drops containing preservatives. The 
mean OSDI score at baseline was in the range of mildly affected 
quality of life and the mean score at follow‑up was in the range 
of normal QoL. In our study, mean OSDI scores in patients with 
mild, moderate, and severe dryness of the eyes were all in the 
range of mildly affected QoL which is difficult to explain. One 
probable reason could be can be due to subjective variation in 
responses given by patients to the OSDI questionnaire.
We evaluated the effect of different active ingredients used 
for the treatment of DES in the treating eye drops based on the 
OSDI QoL scores. The mean OSDI score difference was highest 
with carboxy methyl cellulose (mean OSDI difference = 10.42). 
The mean OSDI score difference was least with hydroxy propyl 
methyl cellulose (mean OSDI difference = 5.8). However, on the 
application of one‑way ANOVA to check for the difference in 
the improvement of QoL scores in relation to active ingredients, 
we did not find a statistically significant difference.
We also evaluated the effect of preservatives used in treating 
eye drops on the OSDI QoL scores. The mean OSDI score 
difference was highest with D panthenol and phenylmercuric 
N (mean OSDI difference = 10). The mean OSDI score difference 
was least with carbomer polymer c (mean OSDI difference = 5). 
However, on the application of one‑way ANOVA to check 
for differences in the improvement of QoL scores in relation 
to individual preservatives, we did not find a statistically 
significant difference. A study done by Debbasch et al.
[18]
suggests the cytoprotective effect of carbomer polymer c which 
is in contradiction with our study result which shows the poor 
response with carbomer polymer c.
We also tried to evaluate the difference in QoL scores among 
patients in whom the prescribed eye drops did not contain any 
preservatives as compared to those in whom the prescribed 
eye drops contained preservatives. Thirty‑two patients were 
prescribed eye drops containing preservatives and eight 
patients were prescribed eye drops that did not contain any 
preservative. OSDI scores of patients who were prescribed 
eye drops without preservatives had a greater difference in 
their pre‑ and post‑OSDI scores as compared to those who 
had preservatives in their prescribed eye drop suggesting a 
better outcome with preservative‑free eye drops. However, 
the difference was not statistically significant. One probable 
reason for this could be a small sample size. A prospective 
epidemiological survey carried out by 249 ophthalmologists 
on 4107 patients suggested less incidence of DES when 
preservative‑free eye drops were used.[19] Other studies also 
have similar results in this regard.[15]
OSDI questionnaire contained three domains, namely, 
OSDI symptoms (Domain 1), OSDI function (Domain 2), and 
OSDI triggers (Domain 3). We tried to evaluate the difference 
in improvement in the individual domains based on the mean 
difference of OSDI scores with regard to individual domains at 
baseline and at 15 days of follow‑up. The difference between the 
three domains was negligible and not statistically significant. 
This suggests that there is equivalent improvement in all three 
domains of the OSDI Questionnaire.
Our study and other studies[20,21] suggest that DES has a 
negative impact on several aspects of quality of life. There 
is the improvement of QoL in the treatment of DES with the 
prescribed treatment. We found exposure to a computer/TV 
screen for more than 6 hours to be the most common causative 
factor. The most common treatment modality was the use of 
eye drops containing sodium hyaluronate. Stabilized oxychloro 
complex was the most common preservative used in our study. 
Both, in relation to the active ingredients and the preservatives 
used in treating eye drops, there was no statistically 
significant difference within the active ingredients and also 
within preservatives in improvement in QoL scores. Though 
preservative‑free eye drops showed a better improvement in 
QoL as compared to preservative‑containing eye drops, the 
difference was not statistically significant.
Strengths of the Study
• This study not only evaluates treatment modalities in 
DES but also assesses the causative factors, and effects 
of different preservatives in eye drop on the prognosis of 
DES and quality of life using a robust quality of Life (QoL) 
questionnaire, that is, Ocular surface disease index 
Questionnaire (OSDI Questionnaire).
• This study also analyzed improvement in each domain of the 
OSDI Questionnaire like OSDI symptoms, OSDI function, 
and OSDI triggers after treatment.
Limitations of the Study
• This study was a duration‑based study, so a limited sample 
size of 40 patients was collected. Hence, the lacunae 
associated with a small sample size are present.
• We did not compare the quality of life among patients 
receiving either single, dual, or more than two drugs for the 
treatment of DES with each other due to this sample size.
Conclusion
Prevention of exposure to causative factors, early diagnosis, and 
prompt treatment preferably with preservative‑free treatment 
modalities may result in a better clinical outcome. Physicians 
should be encouraged to perform quality of life evaluations 
for patients with DES to guide them in treatment with more 
1592 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology Volume 71 Issue 4
individual‑specific treatment options. Different treatment 
options can be evaluated based on the severity of the disease and 
prescription patterns can be modified accordingly.
Financial support and sponsorship
Nil.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Javadi MA, Feizi S. Dry eye syndrome. J Ophthalmic Vis Res 
2011;6:192–8.
2. Shanti Y, Shehada R, Bakkar MM, Qaddumi J. Prevalence and 
associated risk factors of dry eye disease in 16 northern West bank 
towns in Palestine: A cross‑sectional study. BMC Ophthalmol 
2020;20:26.
3. Akpek EK, Amescua G, Farid M, Garcia‑Ferrer FJ, Lin A, 
Rhee MK, et al. Dry eye syndrome preferred practice pattern®. 
Ophthalmology 2019;126:P286–334.
4. Walsh K, Jones L. The use of preservatives in dry eye drops. Clin 
Ophthalmol 2019;13:1409–25.
5. WHOQOL‑measuring Quality of life. Who.int. Available from: 
https://www.who.int/tools/whoqol.[Last accessed on 2022 Feb 15].
6. Barabino S, LabetoulleM, RolandoM, MessmerEM. Understanding 
symptoms and quality of life in patients with dry eye syndrome. 
Ocul Surf 2016;14:365–76.
7. Craig JP, Nichols KK, Akpek EK, Caffery B, Dua HS, Joo CK, 
et al. TFOS DEWS II definition and classification report. Ocul Surf 
2017;15:276–83.
8. Özcura F, Aydin S, Helvaci MR. Ocular surface disease index 
for the diagnosis of dry eye syndrome. Ocul Immunol Inflamm 
2007;15:389–93.
9. Chatterjee S, Agrawal D, SharmaA. Dry eye disease in India. Indian 
J Ophthalmol 2020;68:1499–500.
10. Neha S, Dhaval B. Prevalence of dry eye disease in western India. 
Int J Contemp Med Res 2019;6:G10–2.
11. McCarty CA, Bansal AK, Livingston PM, Stanislavsky YL, 
Taylor HR. The epidemiology of dry eye in Melbourne, Australia. 
Ophthalmology 1998;105:1114–9.
12. Moss SE, Klein R, Klein BE. Prevalence of and risk factors for dry 
eye syndrome. Arch Ophthalmol 2000;118:1264–8.
13. Schein OD, Muño B, Tielsch JM, Bandeen‑Roche K, West S. 
Prevalence of dry eye among the elderly. Am J Ophthalmol 
1997;124:723–8.
14. Titiyal JS, Falera RC, Kaur M, Sharma V, Sharma N. Prevalence and 
risk factors of dry eye disease in North India: Ocular surface disease 
index‑based cross‑sectional hospital study. Indian J Ophthalmol 
2018;66:207–11.
15. Nasser L, Rozycka M, Rendon GG, Navas A. Real‑life results 
of switching from preserved to preservative‑free artificial tears 
containing hyaluronate in patients with dry eye disease. Clin 
Ophthalmol 2018;12:1519–25.
16. Lopes NLV, Gracitelli CPB, Chalita MR, de Faria NVL. Ocular 
surface evaluation after the substitution of benzalkonium 
chloride preserved prostaglandin eye drops by a preservative‑free 
prostaglandin analogue. Med Hypothesis Discov Innov 
Ophthalmol 2019;8:52–6.
17. Mateo‐Otobia A, Del Prado Sanz E, Martínez AB, Corta MI, Sanz 
MR, Pablo Júlvez LE, et al. Evaluation of ocular surface disease 
symptoms and patient satisfaction in dry eye disease after 84 days 
of treatment with preservative‐free eye drops containing sodium 
hyaluronate and trehalose. Acta Ophthalmologica. 2022;100.
18. Debbasch C, De La Salle SB, Brignole F, Rat P, Warnet JM, 
Baudouin C. Cytoprotective effects of hyaluronic acid and 
Carbomer 934P in ocular surface epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol 
Vis Sci 2002;43:3409–15.
19. Pisella PJ, Pouliquen P, Baudouin C. Prevalence of ocular 
symptoms and signs with preserved and preservative free 
glaucoma medication. Br J Ophthalmol 2002;86:418–23.
20. Uchino M, Schaumberg DA. Dry eye disease: Impact on quality of 
life and vision. Curr Ophthalmol Rep 2013;1:51–7.
21. Miljanović B, Dana R, Sullivan DA, Schaumberg DA. Impact of dry 
eye syndrome on vision‑related quality of life. Am J Ophthalmol 
2007;143:409–15.
