TFOS DEWS II Management and Therapy Report
Lyndon Jones, FCOptom, PhD a, 1, *
, Laura E. Downie, BOptom, PhD b
, Donald Korb, OD c
,
Jose M. Benitez-del-Castillo, MD, PhD d
, Reza Dana, MD e
, Sophie X. Deng, MD, PhD f
,
Pham N. Dong, MD g
, Gerd Geerling, MD, FEBO h
, Richard Yudi Hida, MD i
, Yang Liu, MD j
,
Kyoung Yul Seo, MD, PhD k
, Joseph Tauber, MD l
, Tais H. Wakamatsu, MD, PhD m,
Jianjiang Xu, MD, PhD n
, James S. Wolffsohn, FCOptom, PhD o
,
Jennifer P. Craig, MCOptom, PhD p
a Centre for Contact Lens Research, School of Optometry and Vision Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
b Department of Optometry and Vision Sciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia
c Korb & Associates, Boston, MA, USA d Department of Ophthalmology, University of Complutense, Madrid, Spain
e Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, MA, USA f Stein Eye Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA
g Department of Corneal and External Disease, Vietnam National Institute of Ophthalmology, Hanoi, Viet Nam
h Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Duesseldorf, Germany
i Department of Ophthalmology, Santa Casa de Sao Paulo, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil
j Schepens Eye Research Institute, Massachusetts Eye & Ear, Boston, MA, USA k Department of Ophthalmology, Yonsei University Medical College, Seoul, South Korea
l Tauber Eye Center, Kansas City, MO, USA
m Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Paulista School of Medicine, Sao Paulo Hospital, Federal University of S ~ ao Paulo, S ~ ao Paulo, Brazil ~
n Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Eye, and ENT Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, China
o Ophthalmic Research Group, Aston University, Birmingham, UK
p Department of Ophthalmology, New Zealand National Eye Centre, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
article info
Article history:
Received 2 May 2017
Accepted 3 May 2017
Keywords:
Dry eye disease
Dry eye workshop
Management
TFOS DEWS II
Therapy
abstract
The members of the Management and Therapy Subcommittee undertook an evidence-based review of
current dry eye therapies and management options. Management options reviewed in detail included
treatments for tear insufficiency and lid abnormalities, as well as anti-inflammatory medications, sur￾gical approaches, dietary modifications, environmental considerations and complementary therapies.
Following this extensive review it became clear that many of the treatments available for the manage￾ment of dry eye disease lack the necessary Level 1 evidence to support their recommendation, often due
to a lack of appropriate masking, randomization or controls and in some cases due to issues with se￾lection bias or inadequate sample size.
Reflecting on all available evidence, a staged management algorithm was derived that presents a step￾wise approach to implementing the various management and therapeutic options according to disease
severity. While this exercise indicated that differentiating between aqueous-deficient and evaporative
dry eye disease was critical in selecting the most appropriate management strategy, it also highlighted
challenges, based on the limited evidence currently available, in predicting relative benefits of specific
management options, in managing the two dry eye disease subtypes.
Further evidence is required to support the introduction, and continued use, of many of the treatment
options currently available to manage dry eye disease, as well as to inform appropriate treatment starting
points and understand treatment specificity in relation to dry eye disease subtype.
© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: lwjones@uwaterloo.ca (L. Jones). 1 Subcommittee Chair
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Ocular Surface
journal homepage: www.theocularsurface.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtos.2017.05.006
1542-0124/© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628
1. Introduction
This report summarizes the management and therapeutic op￾tions for treating dry eye disease (DED). The goals of this committee
were to review appropriate methods for the management of DED
and recommend a strategy for their clinical application, based on an
evidence-based review of the literature. The level of evidence for
supporting data from the literature is evaluated according to the
modified American Academy of Ophthalmology Preferred Practices
guidelines (Table 1).
Wherever possible, peer-reviewed publications, rather than
abstracts, have been used to guide management recommendations.
In some instances, due to the relatively recent introduction of the
therapy under discussion, this was not possible. The report was
reviewed by all subcommittee members and made available for
constructive critique by the entire Tear Film and Ocular Surface
Society's Dry Eye Workshop II (TFOS DEWS II) membership. Com￾ments and suggested revisions were discussed by the subcom￾mittee members and incorporated into the report where deemed
appropriate by consensus.
Advances in our understanding of the risk factors, etiology and
pathophysiology of DED have contributed to an evolution in
treatment strategies over time. In the years following publication of
the original TFOS Dry Eye Workshop (DEWS) Management and
Therapy Report [1], there has been a growing realization of the
important contribution of meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD) to
both symptoms and signs of DED [2].
While classification is discussed in greater depth in other sec￾tions of this report [3], it is important to note that diagnostic labels
have a significant bearing on subsequent management and treat￾ment. It is generally believed that rather than representing two
distinct categories, most people with symptoms related to ocular
surface disease (OSD) suffer from variable combinations of both
abnormal meibomian gland physiology (resulting in evaporative
DED) and tear underproduction (resulting in aqueous deficient
DED). Estimates of the degree of overlap of these two categories
have ranged from 30 to 70%, but these are estimates made by cli￾nicians using clinical judgment. One published study found pa￾tients with DED were over three times more likely to be sub￾classified as having evaporative dry eye (EDE) than aqueous defi-
cient dry eye (ADDE), and over 30% of patients had both types of
DED [4].
Regardless of the accuracy of these figures, clinicians around the
world recognize the necessity to treat “dry eye patients” in a
comprehensive way, taking into account their symptoms, meibo￾mian gland physiology, tear film lipid quality and quantity, mei￾bomian gland orifice patency, and also tear production, loss and
runoff [5e9]. If only one of these two broad categories of OSD (EDE
and ADDE) is addressed therapeutically, patients may continue to
suffer symptoms and report dissatisfaction with the prescribed
treatment. It is necessary to first diagnose patients accurately, with
respect to recognizing the major cause behind their DED, before
crafting a treatment plan. Further information on diagnosis of OSD
is covered in the TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology Report [10].
2. Treatments for tear insufficiency
Historically, DED was considered to be largely due to tear
insufficiency and was treated by prescribing tear replacement
products or by conserving the tears via punctal plugs. More recent
treatments have included the use of methods to stimulate tears.
2.1. Tear replacement approaches
Tear replacement with ocular lubricants is traditionally
considered a mainstay of DED therapy and there are numerous
topical formulations available. Over-the-counter (OTC) products are
often termed “artificial tears” which, as their name suggests,
attempt to replace and/or supplement the natural tear film. How￾ever, these products do not target the underlying pathophysiology
of DED, and the mechanisms of any palliative actions are generally
poorly understood.
2.1.1. Artificial tear substitutes
Tear substitutes comprise a wide variety of products, which
typically aim to target one or more layers of the tear film. The wide
variety of properties of these ocular lubricants has been reviewed
elsewhere [11e15].
Ocular lubricants are largely regarded as safe, although there are
some reported side effects, most notably blurred vision, variable
levels of “ocular discomfort” and foreign body sensation [16]. There
are relatively few randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that have
compared the relative superiority of a particular OTC product to
others for DED therapy [17]. A recent Cochrane systematic review,
which sought to evaluate the effect of OTC tear supplement prod￾ucts for treating DED, included 43 randomized controlled trials that
had compared artificial tear formulations to no treatment, or pla￾cebo [16]. The primary outcome measure was patient-reported
symptoms. The authors reported that the overall quality of evi￾dence was low for the various tear supplement formulations
compared in the review, and concluded that while artificial tears
may be effective for treating DED, there was still a need for future
research to enable robust conclusions to be drawn about the
effectiveness of individual OTC artificial tear formulations.
2.1.1.1. Aqueous supplementation. While ocular lubricant formula￾tions may vary in osmolarity, viscosity and pH, most share simi￾larities in their major components. The most abundant component
Table 1
Research evidence grading scheme.
Clinical Studies
Level 1 Evidence obtained from at least one properly conducted, well-designed, randomized, controlled trial, or evidence from well-designed studies applying rigorous
statistical approaches
Level 2 Evidence obtained from one of the following: a well-designed controlled trial without randomization, a well-designed cohort or case-control analytic study,
preferably from one or more center, or a well-designed study accessible to more rigorous statistical analysis
Level 3 Evidence obtained from one of the following: descriptive studies, case reports, reports of expert committees, expert opinion
Basic Science Studies
Level 1 Well-performed studies confirming a hypothesis with adequate controls published in a high-impact journal
Level 2 Preliminary or limited published study
Level 3 Meeting abstracts or unpublished presentations
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 576
in lubricant eye drops is the aqueous base. To enhance lubrication
and prolong the retention time on the ocular surface, a variety of
viscosity enhancing agents are frequently incorporated.
2.1.1.1.1. Viscosity-enhancing agents. The viscosity-enhancing
agents used in tear supplement formulations include carbomer
940 (polyacrylic acid), carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), dextran,
hyaluronic acid (HA), HP-guar, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose
(HPMC), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and
polyethylene glycol.
Viscosity enhancers are considered beneficial to the ocular
surface in DED through a range of reported mechanisms. These
include increasing tear film thickness, protecting against desicca￾tion, promoting tear retention at the ocular surface, protecting the
ocular surface, maintaining physiological corneal thickness,
improving goblet cell density and relieving dry eye symptoms
[18,19]. Although there are scores of formulations and products
available, which vary by geographic region, there does not appear
to be any substantial difference in effectiveness among them
[16,20]. However, the differences in the viscosity of the drops can
influence utilization. Eye drops with high viscosity can increase
retention time on the ocular surface, but may also cause transient
visual disturbances and result in unwanted debris on the eyelids
and lashes, leading to decreased tolerance and compliance. Very
high viscosity eye drops are typically recommended for overnight
use, with low-viscosity drops being used in the daytime.
2.1.1.1.1.1. Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC)
CMC is a cellulose derivative with carboxymethyl groups and is
formed from the cell walls of plants. It is often used as its sodium
salt, sodium carboxymethyl cellulose, and is also termed carmellose
sodium. It is a very commonly used viscosity-enhancing agent in
ocular lubricants as well as in pharmaceuticals, foods and cosmetics
[21].
CMC can bind to corneal epithelial cells and promote epithelial
cell healing [22,23]. CMC-based products have been proven to be
successful in the management of mild-to-moderate dry eye in a
number of studies [24e26].
2.1.1.1.1.2. Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC)
Cellulose ethers are viscoelastic polysaccharides that increase
the viscosity of the tears. Of these, HPMC has been used for many
years in artificial lubricants and remains one of the most common
ingredients. It is available in a wide variety of concentrations (from
0.2 to 0.8%) and is used in combination with many other compo￾nents in modern ocular lubricants [11,14]. Due to its wide avail￾ability and use over many years, multiple studies have explored its
potential to manage patients with DED [16]. A review of its per￾formance shows that it is a safe and effective lubricant for those
with low-to-moderate symptoms of DED [16].
2.1.1.1.1.3. Hyaluronic acid (HA)
Hyaluronic acid (HA), also termed hyaluron and sodium hya￾luronate, is a naturally occurring anionic, non-sulfated glycosami￾noglycan that is distributed widely throughout connective,
epithelial, and neural tissues. It can be very large, with its molecular
weight often reaching several million Daltons. HA is an important
component of articular cartilage and is found in abundance in sy￾novial fluid around joints, in the vitreous and aqueous humour [27].
A number of studies have demonstrated its ability to bind to ocular
surface cells and its potential wound healing properties [28e33].
HA is used in a variety of tear supplements to increase viscosity
and provide enhanced lubrication. HA exhibits non-Newtonian
shear-thinning properties [34], where viscosity varies with shear
rate. For HA-based solutions, the viscosity decreases with
increasing shear rate, as occurs during a blink.
As the range of commercial products that contain HA increases,
a growing number of Level 1 and 2 clinical studies have been
published that demonstrate good tolerability and the ability to
improve dry eye symptoms [35e42].
2.1.1.1.1.4. Combination of CMC and HA
As described above, there are a number of publications sup￾porting the use of topical drops that contain CMC or HA in the
management of DED. Optive Fusion™ (Allergan, Parkway Parsip￾pany, NJ, USA)) contains a combination of 0.5% CMC and 0.1% HA in
a single topical formulation. In a murine dry eye study, mice
administered CMC þ HA topically showed significantly lower
corneal fluorescein staining and higher goblet cell density than
mice treated with drops containing CMC or HA alone [43]. In a 3-
month, double-masked, multicenter study involving 305 subjects
with DED, the commercially available combination of CMC þ HA
improved symptoms and signs of DED more than a commercially
available topical formulation based on CMC alone [44].
2.1.1.1.1.5. Hydroxypropyl-guar (HP-guar)
HP-guar is a non-ionic, polymeric thickener that can rapidly
confer high viscosity, through a pH-dependent process [45,46]. One
HP-guar-based product, Systane® ULTRA (Alcon, Ft Worth, TX, USA),
includes two demulcents (polyethylene glycol 400 and propylene
glycol), and sorbitol, and is buffered with borate, resulting in a
partially crosslinked borate/HP-guar gel in the bottle [47]. The pH of
Systane ULTRA is 7.9 but when instilled onto the ocular surface, the
reduction in pH, and dilution of the sorbitol concentration, in￾creases the density of the borate/hydroxypropyl-guar crosslinks,
producing a very low viscosity gel [45].
HP-guar-based products have been shown to improve dry eye
symptoms, increase mucous layer thickness, reduce inflammation
and protect the ocular surface [47e53].
2.1.1.1.1.6. Combination of HA and HP-guar
A formulation containing the demulcents propylene glycol and
polyethylene glycol and a dual polymer combination of HA and HP￾guar (Systane® ULTRA HYDRATION; Alcon, Ft Worth, TX, USA) has
been shown to be effective in desiccation protection and retention
on the ocular surface in a corneal cell-based laboratory study [54].
2.1.1.1.1.7. Hydroxypropyl cellulose
The concept of using a dissolvable hydroxypropyl cellulose
insert on the ocular surface to manage DED was first approved by
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) over 30 years ago, but for
many years lost favour due to discomfort and relatively poor effi-
cacy [55]. The newest version of this concept is LACRISERT™
(Bausch & Lomb, Rochester, NY, USA), which is a sterile, translucent,
rod-shaped, water soluble, preservative-free, slow-release lubri￾cant that is placed into the inferior cul-de-sac with the aid of a
reusable applicator. It begins to soften within minutes, dissolving
over the course of about 12 h and thickening the precorneal tear
film. It is recommended for use in patients with moderate to severe
DED, is usually inserted once a day and is contraindicated in pa￾tients who are hypersensitive to hydroxypropyl cellulose.
A multicenter, 2-visit, open-label, 4-week study was conducted
to determine the acceptability of the inserts in 520 subjects with
DED [56]. There was a significant improvement in symptoms,
corneal fluorescein staining, conjunctival staining and tear volume.
Contact lens wearers reported significant improvements, similar to
non-wearers. Reported complications include transient blurring of
vision, discomfort or irritation (particularly if not located appro￾priately), expulsion in patients with shallow conjunctival fornices
and matting or stickiness of the eyelashes.
2.1.1.1.2. Osmotic agents. The original TFOS DEWS report drew
attention to the importance of tear osmolarity, demonstrating that
raised tear osmolarity is associated with DED [57]. Since that time,
many studies have examined the link between DED and osmolarity.
However, relatively few studies have investigated the impact of tear
supplement hypo- or hyper-osmolar drops on tear osmolarity and
any improvements in DED. Gilbard conducted a number of exper￾iments to show that the use of a hypo-osmolar ocular lubricant
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 577
could reverse various ocular surface changes (notably reduced
goblet cell density) induced in a dry eye rabbit model [58e60]. Two
more recent studies using hypotonic hyaluronic acid-based ocular
lubricants demonstrated an improvement in both symptoms and
various signs of DED [61,62]. However, more studies linking the
ability of lubricants to reduce tear film osmolarity and their impact
upon DED symptoms and signs are warranted.
A number of published studies demonstrate the potential to
improve tear osmolarity with DED treatments [63e70], even in the
absence of a change [71,72], or in association with negative out￾comes [68,73,74], in other clinical features.
Since the publication of the first TFOS DEWS report, several
examples of tracking dry eye therapy with tear osmolarity have
been published. A study investigating the effects of a combination
therapy of methylprednisolone and preservative-free 0.1% HA four
times a day demonstrated a significant reduction in osmolarity at
eight weeks that paralleled significant reductions in IL-1b and IL-8,
as well as tear break up time (TBUT), corneal and conjunctival
staining [75]. The authors concluded that measuring the changes in
cytokine levels and tear osmolarity could objectively evaluate the
anti-inflammatory effects of topical methylprednisolone applied in
the treatment of patients with moderate to severe dry eye syn￾drome. A similar eight-week trial of a modified HA applied three
times daily resulted in significant improvements in Ocular Surface
Disease Index (OSDI) score, TBUT, conjunctival goblet cell density,
corneal and conjunctival damage and tear osmolarity [66].
Tear osmolarity has also been shown to parallel improvements
in dry eye symptoms and signs when patients use topical cyclo￾sporine [63,76,77], HA [40,66,78e80], osmoprotective drops
[40,67,69], and PEG/HP-Guar drops [81].
2.1.1.1.3. Osmoprotectants. Osmoprotectants (e.g., L-carnitine
and betaine) are a group of compatible solutes that protect cells
under extreme osmotic stress by balancing the osmotic pressure
without disturbing cell metabolism [82e85]. The osmoprotective
effect depends on the amount of drug uptake and its retention time,
and combinations of osmoprotectants with different pharmaceu￾tical kinetics may function better than individual osmoprotectants.
There are a number of studies demonstrating that osmopro￾tectants have a beneficial effect on the treatment of DED. An in vitro
study showed that the osmoprotectants L-carnitine and erythritol
can protect cultured human corneal epithelial cells from hyper￾osmolar conditions by lowering levels of activated mitogen￾activated protein kinases [86]. The osmoprotectants also showed
inflammatory-suppressing properties under hyperosmotic stress
[87]. A dry eye mouse study showed that osmoprotectants can
reduce corneal staining, decrease cell apoptosis and inflammatory
cytokines and increase the number of goblet cells [88].
Trehalose is a naturally occurring dissacharide, present in
numerous non-mammalian species, which allows cells to survive in
unfavorable environments. It is implicated in anhydrobiosis, which
relates to the ability of plants and animals to withstand prolonged
periods of desiccation. It has very high water retention capabilities
and has the dual properties of both bioprotection and osmopro￾tection [89e94]. In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that
trehalose protects corneal cells from desiccation [95], as well as
protecting corneal and conjunctival cells against apoptosis [90,96].
Trehalose has also been shown to protect corneal cells against ul￾traviolet (UV)-induced oxidative damage by accelerating corneal
healing [97], and reducing conjunctival inflammatory cytokines in a
murine model of DED [92]. It also helps to restore osmotic balance
to the ocular surface, as well as preventing denaturation of cell
membrane lipid bilayers and proteins to maintain the homeostasis
of corneal cells [90e92].
A new eye drop formulation that contains both HA and trehalose
has been developed to capitalize on the lubricant properties of HA
and bioprotectant properties of trehalose [98].
2.1.1.1.4. Antioxidants. The presence of oxygen free radicals in
the tears of patients with DED [99] has resulted in exploration of
the potential application of antioxidants for the management of
DED.
In an animal study, topical acetylcysteine, an amino acid with
antioxidant activity, decreased inflammatory cytokine expression in
ocular surface tissues of a mouse model of DED, but did not alter
corneal staining [100]. Another antioxidant eye drop, vitamin A
(retinyl palmitate), showed significant effects in improving blurred
vision, TBUT, Schirmer score, and impression cytology findings in
subjects with DED in a prospective, randomized, controlled, parallel
study [101]. However, vitamin A metabolites are also known to cause
MGD in animal models, including glandular keratinization and atro￾phy, reduced quality of meibum, reduced tear film break up time,
increased tear film osmolarity, and dry eye symptoms (further details
are included in the TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic Dry Eye Report) [102].
A study using stratified human corneal limbal epithelial cells
showed that several antioxidants may be beneficial if incorporated
into topical ocular lubricants [103]. Quercetin, epigallocatechin
gallate, n-propyl gallate, and gallic acid displayed good bioavail￾ability, were effective at quenching reactive oxygen species and
might be effective in protecting the corneal epithelium from
oxidative damage.
Visomitin is the first registered drug with antioxidative prop￾erties that targets oxidative stress in mitochondria and is available
as a topical drug in Russia. A recent multicenter, randomized,
double-masked, placebo-controlled clinical study showed that a 6-
week course of topical Visomitin reduced corneal staining and
improved symptoms in 240 subjects with DED [104]. It may act
through reducing reactive oxygen species on the ocular surface, but
further studies are required to confirm this.
Selenoprotein P (SelP) is a secreted glycoprotein that is involved
in the transport or storage of selenium, and is involved in oxidative
stress metabolism [105]. In a rat dry eye model, the use of SelP eye
drops for 3 weeks suppressed markers of oxidative stress and tears
collected from human subjects with corneal staining were lower in
SelP [106]. The authors concluded that tear SelP is a key molecule to
protect the ocular surface against environmental oxidative stress.
2.1.1.1.5. Preservatives. Multidose artificial lubricants typically
require a preservative to prevent microbial growth, whereas unit
dose vials that are discarded after a single use do not. However, unit
dose vials are more expensive and may be more difficult for less
dextrous individuals to open. A number of new products are now
available that utilise dispensers that incorporate unidirectional
valves that allow multidose bottles to be unpreserved.
Increasing attention has been directed to the relationship be￾tween the chronic use of topical therapies, such as glaucoma
medications, and OSD. Chronic exposure of the ocular surface to
preservatives is now well recognized to induce toxicity and adverse
changes to the ocular surface [107e112]. Benzalkonium chloride
(BAK) is the most frequently used preservative in eye drop prepa￾rations. There are many in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrating
that BAK can induce corneal and conjunctival epithelial cell
apoptosis, damage the corneal nerves, delay corneal wound heal￾ing, interfere with tear film stability and cause loss of goblet cells
[113e115]. In an in vitro study, a BAK concentration in excess of
0.005% significantly impaired lipid spreading and compromised the
morphology of the tear lipid layer [116]. Sufficient evidence exists
to confirm that patients with DED, particularly those with severe
DED who require frequent dosing with lubricants or who use ocular
lubricants in conjunction with other chronic topical therapies, such
as glaucoma medications, should avoid the use of ocular lubricants
preserved with BAK [102].
To avoid issues with long-term exposure to preservatives, newer
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 578
variants of preservatives designed to have a lower impact on the
ocular surface have been developed, including oxidative pre￾servatives (sodium chlorite; Purite® and OcuPure™ and sodium
perborate; GenAqua™), polyquaternium-1 (Polyquad®) and Sof￾Zia™. Sodium chlorite degrades to chloride ions and water upon
exposure to UV light after instillation and sodium perborate is
converted to water and oxygen on contact with the tear film. Some
reports suggest that even these so-called “disappearing pre￾servatives” can show some negative effects on the ocular surface
[117]. Therefore, preservative-free drops may be a better choice for
patients who have pre-existing ocular surface conditions and/or
need frequent instillation of eye drops. Preservative-free eye drops
have shown greater effectiveness than preserved drops in
decreasing inflammation on the ocular surface and increasing the
antioxidant contents in tears of patients with DED [118]. While
ideally all prescribed dry eye products would be supplied in unit
dose or unpreserved multi-dose bottles, cost considerations and
product availability often prevent this from being possible.
Further information on preservative interactions with the ocular
surface can be found in the TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic Dry Eye Report
[102].
2.1.1.1.6. Inactive agents
2.1.1.1.6.1. Buffers
The stability of commonly used ophthalmic solutions is
controlled largely by the pH of their environment. In addition to
stability, pH can influence comfort, safety, and activity of the
product. Dry eye products contain a wide variety of buffers to
control pH, including citrate, phosphate and borate buffers. The
concentration of such buffers is critical, as reports exist of corneal
calcification following extensive use of a dry eye product preserved
with elevated levels of calcium phosphate [119].
Sodium borate, also known as sodium tetraborate or disodium
tetraborate, is a salt of boric acid. Boric acid is a weak acid that is
used as a buffering agent in some eye drops. Studies have shown
that contact lens multipurpose solutions (MPS) containing boric
acid may exhibit corneal epithelial cytotoxicity [120]. However,
others have reported that MPS-induced ocular surface defects may
be incorrectly attributed to boric acid [121]. The potential benefits,
or otherwise, of boric acid or indeed any other buffers in dry eye
formulations remain unclear. However, of note is that boric acid at
ocular surface pH also acts as a cross-linking agent and electro￾statically binds to hydroxypropyl guar (HP-guar) [122,123].
2.1.1.1.6.2. Excipients
Due to the delicate structure of the ocular tissues, the number of
acceptable excipients for eye drops is limited, and consists mainly
of ionic and non-ionic isotonic agents. There are limited published
studies concerning the effect of excipients on the ocular surface
[124]. Recently, macrogolglycerol hydroxystearate 40 (MGH 40),
has been used in preservative-free eye drops as a solubilizing
excipient. An animal study showed that MGH 40 is well tolerated
[125]. However, a prior in vitro study revealed that MGH 40 triggers
similar detrimental effects in cells as that seen with BAK [126].
Another study examined the role of poly(L-lysine)-graft-poly(-
ethylene glycol) (PLL-g-PEG) as a novel polymer excipient in arti-
ficial tears [127]. A single-center study showed that PLL-g-PEG was
effective in prolonging non-invasive break up time (NIBUT) 15 min
after instillation [127]. More studies are needed to clarify the
impact of the various excipients on the ocular surface.
2.1.1.1.6.3. Electrolytes
The pre-corneal tear film is a complex milieu that is rich in
electrolytes, including sodium, potassium, chlorine, magnesium
and calcium [128]. When secreted, tears are isotonic with serum,
although the proportions of ions are somewhat different, especially
potassium [129,130]. In DED, the concentration of electrolytes in
the tear film typically increases due to evaporation and/or reduced
aqueous production.
Electrolytes perform critical roles in ocular surface homeostasis.
Observations suggest that the relatively high potassium levels in
tears may play a role in protecting the corneal epithelium from UV￾B radiation [131,132]. Potassium has also been shown to be neces￾sary to maintain normal corneal thickness, and decreases in the
potassium concentration may result in an increase in corneal
thickness [133]. Finally, the quality of the corneal epithelial surface
integrity and light scattering properties, as measured by specular
microscopy, have been shown to be dependent on electrolyte
composition [134]. The epithelial surface is best maintained with a
buffered solution containing potassium, calcium, magnesium,
phosphate, bicarbonate and sodium chloride, with potassium being
particularly important [134].
Certain tear lubricants, such as TheraTears® (Akorn Lake Forrest,
IL, USA) and Bion® Tears (Alcon Ft Worth, TX, USA), have an elec￾trolyte profile that is intended to reflect that of the tear film. Some
of the commonly used electrolyte salts include sodium chloride,
potassium chloride, calcium chloride, magnesium chloride, zinc
chloride, sodium borate, sodium phosphate and boric acid. Sodium
bicarbonate is used to buffer the solution, but also has an electro￾lyte effect [135]. An electrolyte-based artificial tear formulation has
been shown to increase conjunctival goblet cell density and corneal
glycogen content in a rabbit model of DED [58,59]. Other studies
have shown that the inclusion of potassium with HA in non￾preserved artificial tears enhances corneal wound healing in a
mechanical scraping model [33]. The addition of bicarbonate to an
isotonic, non-preserved artificial tear solution promotes recovery of
the corneal epithelium compared with the same solution buffered
with borate or without a buffer [136]. A separate study showed that
addition of bicarbonate promoted recovery of epithelial barrier
function and maintained normal corneal and mucin layer ultra￾structure after exposure to BAK [137]. To date, in vitro, animal and
human studies would suggest that certain electrolyte compositions
could have a positive role in the management of DED with ocular
lubricants.
2.1.1.2. Lipid supplementation. The lipid layer of the tear film has an
important role to play in preventing tear evaporation [138]. Lipid￾containing eye drops are growing in both availability and popu￾larity [139,140], primarily due to the increased attention being paid
to MGD and lipid deficiency. A variety of oils, such as mineral oils
and phospholipids, have been incorporated in ocular lubricant
formulations to help restore the lipid layer of the tear film
[46,141,142].
Lipid-containing drops are formulated as emulsions. Emulsions
are defined as non-soluble liquids that are finely dispersed within
another liquid, such as oil and water [143]. Emulsions are not
readily formed and extreme shear forces and pressure must be
applied with the appropriate surfactants to overcome the effects of
surface tension [143].
Emulsions can be broadly categorized into three types, based
upon the droplet size. Macroemulsions contain droplets larger than
100 nm (nm), nanoemulsions have droplets between 10 and 100 nm
and microemulsions have droplets < 10 nm. Macroemulsions are
cloudy because the large droplet sizes scatter light and these for￾mulations can induce blur when applied topically. To minimize the
potential blurring effect on vision, as well as the stability of the
emulsion upon instillation, particle size, concentration and type of
lipids can be manipulated. Smaller droplet sizes minimize blurring
on installation because the droplet structures are smaller than
visible wavelengths, which prevents scattering. A number of com￾mercial products employ meta-stable emulsions to minimize blur
time and therefore require the dispensing bottle to be inverted or
shaken to enhance uniformity of the emulsion prior to application.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 579
Emulsions have been demonstrated to effectively deliver lipo￾philic drugs, a task that is challenging for aqueous-based carriers.
Newer approaches employ cationic submicron oil-in-water (o/w)
vectors, which exploit the negative charges at the mucin layer
[144]. A cationic o/w nanoemulsion is a biphasic formulation that
comprises positively charged oil nanodroplets (the oil phase)
dispersed in water (the continuous phase). The positive charge of
the oil nanodroplets is brought about by a cationic surfactant that
localizes itself at the oil interface. It is believed that when a cationic
o/w nanoemulsion eye drop is instilled, the resultant electrostatic
attraction between the positively charged oil nanodroplets and the
negatively charged ocular surface mucins manifests itself macro￾scopically as an improved spreading and retention time [145]. It is
possible that this interaction could be modified by exposure to
cationic tear film proteins, such as lysozyme. This is of particular
interest for patients with MGD who exhibit reduced tear film sta￾bility due to lipid deficiency within their tears [146].
Even in the absence of an active ingredient, these cationic o/w
nanoemulsions have been observed in preclinical studies to have an
inherent benefit on the ocular surface [147,148]. Cationorm®
(Santen Osaka, Japan) is a preservative-free cationic emulsion
indicated for the treatment of DED. The cationic excipient is
cetalkonium chloride, an alkyl derivative of BAK that is lipophilic
[148]. Some studies have shown that Cationorm is well tolerated by
human corneal epithelial cells in culture [146,149]. However,
another in vitro study demonstrated that corneas treated with
Cationorm suffered epithelial loss and alterations to the superficial
corneal stroma [150]. Cationic-based nanosystems incorporating
chitosan provide alternative formulation strategies [151e153].
The long-term safety of nanoemulsions on the ocular surface
remains to be evaluated.
2.1.1.2.1. Types and properties of lipids. Different types of lipids
have been proposed to try to best mimic natural meibum. The types
of lipids used include phospholipids, saturated and unsaturated
fatty acids, and triglycerides [154]. Mineral oil in various concen￾trations, castor oil, olive oil, glycerin carbomers, coconut oil, soy￾bean oil and lecithin, in combination with various emulsifying
agents and surfactants, have been described [155e161].
Phospholipids can be neutral (zwitterionic), negatively (anionic)
or positively (cationic) charged. Systane® Balance (Alcon Ft Worth,
TX, USA) contains a polar phospholipid, DMPG (dimyr￾istoylphosphatidylglycerol). Many types of phospholipids exist and,
of these, two are commonly found in the tears - phosphatidyl￾choline and phosphatidylethanolamine [162e172]. It appears that
anionic phospholipids have a greater ability to increase lipid layer
thickness than zwitterionic compounds [46,173]. A possible reason
is that negatively charged phospholipids contribute to a stable
interface between non-polar lipids at the surface of the hydrophilic
aqueous layer [174]. This supports a suggestion that polar phos￾pholipids help to form a stable multi-molecular lipid film [175].
Studies suggest that lower levels of the two polar phospholipids are
present in individuals with tear film deficiencies [165,176]. Further
information can be obtained in the TFOS DEWS II Tear Film Report
[128].
Multiple studies have shown that lipid-based drops and lipo￾somal sprays can improve signs and symptoms of dry eye (Table 2)
[65,141,142,177e182].
2.1.2. Biological tear substitutes
2.1.2.1. Autologous serum
2.1.2.1.1. Background. Serum is the fluid component of blood
that remains after clotting. Although the topical use of autologous
serum was described in the 1970's [183], it was only popularized for
the management of severe OSD such as that associated with
chemical burns, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and Sjogren syndrome €
many years later [184e186]. More recently, it has also been used for
several less severe conditions, including post-laser epithelial ker￾atomileusis (LASEK), recurrent corneal erosions, late onset bleb￾leaks after trabeculectomy or tissue necrosis after orbital im￾plants [187e189].
The advantage of autologous serum is that many of its
biochemical characteristics, including pH, nutrient content, vita￾mins, fibronectin, growth factors such as epithelial growth factor
(EGF) or nerve growth factor (NGF), are similar to that of human
tears. Several in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that serum and
other blood derivatives enhance corneal epithelial wound healing,
probably due to these factors [190e194]. Serum was also found to
inhibit the release of inflammatory cytokines and to increase the
number of goblet cells and mucin expression in the conjunctiva in a
clinical case series [195,196]. While evidence from cell cultures
suggests that proliferation of epithelial cells is enhanced by diluting
the serum to 20% or less, epithelial migration and extracellular
matrix deposition from fibroblasts is better stimulated by 50% or
100% serum [197,198]. In a rabbit model, undiluted serum was more
effective than diluted serum in healing a corneal epithelial wound
[192].
The widespread use of autologous serum is limited by a number of
factors. Production of blood products is regulated by national laws,
which may differ significantly between countries. The process is
frequently performed by blood banks and is centralised in some
countries [199e201]. Legal requirements include serological testing
for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis and other con￾ditions, to minimize the risk of disease transmission during produc￾tion or application by others, since unknown systemic infectious
diseases have been observed in more than 3% of blood products [202].
The composition of the autologous serum obtained depends on a
number of production parameters, including clotting or centrifuga￾tion time, and this is likely to have an impact on the epitheliotrophic
effects [203]. To optimize the product and to permit comparison be￾tween studies, standardized protocols have been developed based on
in vitro work, but these have not yet been confirmed in clinical
comparative studies [204,205]. In addition to production issues,
further issues exist around product storage, as the concentration of
growth factorsin autologous serum can reduce over timewhen stored
at 4  C [206]. At  20  C the composition of autologous serum was
found to be stable for up to 9 months [206e208]. Finally, the cost for
autologous serum canprove to be problematic, as a 2e3month supply
can cost hundreds of dollars [205,209]. However, despite these issues,
use of autologous serum in themanagement of severe OSD has gained
widespread acceptance and thus may gain increased insurance￾coverage in the future [210,211].
2.1.2.1.2. Clinical performance. In a Level 3 study, autologous
serum improved symptoms of dry eye within 10 days in approxi￾mately 60% of patients and within two months in 79% of patients
[212]. This effect was sustained throughout a 12-month follow-up
using various symptom questionnaires.
Table 3 presents the results from 14 clinical studies (Levels 1 &
2) on the efficacy of autologous serum in DED [184,186,213e224]. In
these, 349 patients received autologous serum, predominantly for
severe DED due to Sjogren syndrome. Between these studies there €
is substantial variation for production parameters, endpoints,
dosing frequency and duration of treatment. In all of the trials, with
a follow-up between 1 and 3 months, subjects showed significant
improvement in symptoms, with 60e80% of patients showing a
positive response. Typically, TBUT, corneal fluorescein staining and
conjunctival impression cytology improved, while Schirmer scores
remained unaltered.
Prospective comparative cohort studies showed that autologous
serum was less effective in patients who were classified, histori￾cally, with secondary compared to primary Sjogren syndrome and €
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 580
that chronic OSD was more likely to recur after cessation of the
autologous serum than acute OSD [184,186].
In a retrospective case control study (Level 2) of 16 patients with
corneal neuropathy and photoallodynia (increased light sensitivity)
associated with dry eye, in vivo confocal microscopy revealed a
reduced sub-basal corneal nerve length and number [222]. Treat￾ment with autologous serum for 3e4 months resulted in signifi-
cantly decreased symptom severity and substantial improvements
in a variety of nerve parameters. These findings support the posi￾tive effects reported for autologous serum in neurotrophic kerat￾opathy in a clinical cohort of 42 subjects (Level 3) [225].
2.1.2.1.3. Complications and conclusion. Although contamina￾tion of autologous serum is frequent after extended use (30 days) of
dropper bottles, complications arising from contamination are
generally rare [226e228]. However, the lack of a universally
accepted methodology for the preparation of autologous serum and
contamination concerns have hindered regulatory approval and
limited its widespread adoption by clinicians. To overcome this,
100% autologous plasma from plasmapheresis, which minimizes
contamination, has been proposed [229].
In summary, autologous serum contains specific epithelio￾trophic factors such as EGF, NGF, and others, in addition to a high
concentration of proteins such as albumin and fibronectin. Autol￾ogous serum directly supports the proliferation and migration of
epithelial cells or indirectly enhances epithelial viability by binding
and neutralizing inflammatory cytokines. The majority of clinical
trials and case series studying autologous serum suggest that it can
be effective in the management of OSD secondary to DED, probably
due to its anti-inflammatory, epithelio- and neuro-trophic func￾tions, significantly improving signs and symptoms within a few
weeks. While the treatment is resource-intensive, it has few com￾plications, but OSD can recur after cessation of treatment.
2.1.2.2. Adult allogeneic serum. Concerns have been raised
regarding the use of autologous serum when patients have active
systemic inflammation, or fear of venipuncture, or in infants, the
very elderly, or those with chronic anemia [230]. Allogeneic serum
can be an alternative for these patients, and, as it can be prepared
from previously stored blood, is quicker to produce and thus
potentially more convenient. However, concerns remain in using
allogeneic sources for proteins due to the theoretical risk of an
immune response to foreign antigens.
Limited clinical data evaluating the role of allogeneic serum for
the treatment of DED exists. In a series of 16 patients with graft
versus host disease (GVHD), improvements in symptoms as
measured by the OSDI, corneal fluorescein staining, TBUT, goblet
cell density, and tear osmolarity were seen after treatment with
20% allogeneic serum eye drops prepared from the patient's spouse
or related donors and used 6e8 times a day for 4 weeks [231].
Harritshoj and colleagues reported a series of 20 patients with DED
due to GVHD, rheumatoid arthritis and other systemic immune
diseases, and found that 16/20 (80%) of these patients showed
improvements in objective signs and subjective symptoms of DED
with 20% allogeneic serum treatment 6 times a day for 2e4 weeks
[232]. These investigators used ABO specific male donors to exclude
the risk of immune reactivity of ABO antibodies with ocular surface
antigens. However, non-matched serum drops from mixed gender
AB blood group donors have been used in New Zealand since 2007,
with no reported adverse events [233]. To date, there have been no
reports of significant complications associated with unmatched
allogeneic serum, used topically, in the literature.
2.1.2.3. Umbilical cord serum. Umbilical cord serum has similar
advantages to allogeneic serum, in that it can be prepared in large
quantities (up to 250 ml) from a single donor and be used for many
patients. Moreover, it is useful in patients with systemic inflam￾mation, anemia or chronic diseases, who may not be ideal candi￾dates for autologous serum drops. To prepare umbilical cord serum,
Table 2
Comparative studies investigating lubricating eye drops and liposomal sprays for the management of dry eye disease.
Author, Year N Study
period
Treatment groups Parameters with significant improvements Parameters without
significant effect
Korb et al., 2005
[141]
40 15 min Soothea
, Systane LLT improved with both drops. (Soothea
107%; Systane 16%)
None
Scaffidi & Korb,
2007 [142]
41 15 min Refresh Dry Eye Therapy drops; Soothea
drops
LLT improved with both drops;
Soothea > increase than Refresh Dry Eye
Therapy
NA
Wang et al., 2007
[177]
67 4 weeks Carbomer-based, cellulose-based, and
mineral oil-based artificial tear
formulations
Total scores, symptoms, signs, and Schirmer
all improved. Symptoms improved with
Carbomer-based formulation.
None
Craig et al., 2010
[178]
22 30, 60, 90,
135 min
Tears Again (Optrex ActiMist) liposomal
spray
Control: saline spray
LLT, tear film stability, NIBUT, comfort. TMH
Wang et al., 2010
[179]
30 4 weeks Carbomer-based lipid-containing gel
(CBLC), HP-guar gel
Schirmer and patient subjective assessment
were both improved. CBLC > HP-guar.
TBUT were improved equally with both
None
Pult et al., 2012
[180]
80 10 min Optrex ActiMist (AM), DryEyesMist (DEM),
TearMist (TM)
OSDI, NIBUT were both improved by AM DEM & TM decreased
comfort and NIBUT
Tomlinson et al.,
2013 [65]
37 2 weeks Carmellose sodium, carmellose sodium
with lipid, glycerine with lipid drops
Evaporation, TBUT, osmolarity, symptoms.
Lipid evaporation rate improved with lipid
drops compared to non-lipid. Carmellose
sodium with lipid was superior to others.
None
Mutalib et al., 2015
[181]
9
(rabbits)
2 weeks Virgin coconut oil, Tears Naturale II,
Saline
Control: contralateral eye
None NIBUT
redness, corneal
staining, pH, Schirmer
Simmons et al.,
2015 [182]
256 3 months 1 marketed lipid drop,
2 non-marketed lipid drops
Symptoms, OSDI,
TBUT
Corneal staining,
conjunctival staining,
meibomian glands,
Schirmer
LLT e lipid layer thickness, N - number of subjects; NIBUT e non-invasive break up time; OSDI e ocular surface disease index; TBUT e tear break up time. a The Soothe formulation used in these studies is marketed today as Soothe XP.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 581
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 582 Table 3 Clinical studies investigating the use of autologous serum for the management of dry eye disease. Author Evidence level N Indication Follow-up % Serum and diluent Controls Improved No improvement Noble et al., 2004 [213] RCT (Level 1) 16 SS & KCS 3 M 50% (0.9 NaCl) Crossover: Lubricants Symptoms, GCD Kojima et al., 2005 [214] RCT (Level 1) 10 SS & non-SS according to Jap DEG 2 W 20% (0.9% NaCl) AT upre Symptoms, TBUT, CFS Schirmer score Noda-Tsuruya et al., 2006 [215] RCT (Level 1) 12 LASIK 6 M 20% (0.9% NaCl) AT TBUT, CFS Symptoms, Schirmer score Yoon et al., 2007 [216] RCT (Level 1) 41 SS, non-SS 2 M 20% (0.9 NaCl) Umbilical cord serum Symptoms, TBUT, CFS, GCD; Better symptoms, CFS (at 2 M) Schirmer score, corneal sensitivity, tear clearance Urzua et al., 2012 [217] RCT (Level 1) 12 Severe non-SS based on DEWS criteria 2 W (cross over after 7 day washout) 20% AS AT Symptoms (OSDI) Fluorescein staining, TBUT Celebi et al., 2014 [218] Double-masked RCT (Level 1) 20 Schirmer < 5 mm, TBUT <5s, OSDI >40, CFS  1 1 M 20% (0.9% NaCl) Cross-over, Refresh upre Symptoms, TBUT Schirmer score, CFS Hussain et al., 2014 [219] Retrospective chart review 63 Any patient using AS between June 2008 and January 2013 for at least 3 months Up to 48 M 50% (0.9% NaCl) None Schirmer score, OSDI, CFS Hwang et al., 2014 [186] Cohort comparison (Level 2) 20 1 SS* 1 M 50% 2 SS* 1 SS*: Symptoms, CFS, TBUT 2 SS*, possibly due to increased pro-inflammatory cytokine levels Jirsova et al., 2014 [220] Interventional (Level 2) 17 Schirmer I < 5mm/5min; TBUT < 5 s; severe symptoms as defined in DEWS 3 M 20% None Schirmer score, various symptoms, CFS, Impression cytology TBUT, TMH, dryness, discomfort Lopez-Garcia et al., 2014 [221] RCT (Level 1) 26 SS 2 M 20% (0.9 NaCl) AS 20% diluted with HA in contralateral eye Symptoms, TBUT, CFS, GCD improved in both, but better in HA-AS Schirmer score, VA Semeraro et al., 2014 [184] Cohort comparison (Level 2) 26 Acute OSD (Dry eye, neurotrophic keratitis,
Recurrent erosion)
16-31 W 50% (0.9% NaCl) Chronic OSD Epithelial defects all healed 18% recurrence in chronic OSD after
cessation of AS
Aggarwal et al.,
2015 [222]
Interventional (Level 2) 16 Photoallodynia (excluded those
with OSD)
3 M 20% AS None Subbasal corneal nerve density
& morphology, symptoms of
photophobia
GCD density
Li et al., 2015
[223]
RCT (Level 1) 18 SS
Schirmer <5 mm, TBUT <5s, CFS
>5
6 W 50% (0.9 BSS) Silicone hydrogel
contact lens
Symptoms, TBUT, CFS, but
symptoms and CFS better in
control
Schirmer score, BCVA
Mukhopadhyay
et al., 2015
[224]
RCT (Level 1) 52 Schirmer < 5 mm 18 W - 6 on and 12
off treatment)
20% (0.9% NaCl) (1) AT (2) cord
blood serum
Symptoms, TBUT, CFS Schirmer score
1 /2 - primary/secondary (*historical classification); 2 M  2 months; AS e autologous serum; AT - Artificial tears; CFS - corneal fluorescein staining; CL - contact lens; GCD - Goblet cell density; GVHD - Graft versus host disease;
HA e Hyaluronic acid; KCS e keratoconjunctiovitis sicca; Jap DEG - Japanese Dry Eye Group; LASIK e laser in-situ keratomileusis; M  Months; N - number of subjects treated with serum; NaCl e saline; OSD - Ocular surface
disease; OSDI e ocular surface disease index; Oxford - punctate epitheliopathy score; RCT - Randomized controlled trial; s e seconds; SS e Sjogren syndrome; TBUT € e tear breakup time; upre e unpreserved; VA e visual acuity;
W e Weeks.
umbilical cord blood is taken from the umbilical cord vein after
delivery. After centrifugation, the serum is diluted to a 20% con￾centration and administered 4e6 times per day [234].
Umbilical cord serum has a higher concentration of tear com￾ponents such as EGF, NGF and transforming growth factor (TGF)-b
compared to peripheral blood serum [235]. Symptom scores, TBUT,
corneal fluorescein staining and impression cytology findings have
been shown to improve significantly after application of umbilical
cord serum eye drops in patients with DED resistant to conventional
treatment [235] and in ocular GVHD [236]. Comparison of umbilical
cord serum with autologous serum administered 6e10 times a day
showed that although both serum drops resulted in improvement,
umbilical cord serum resulted in lower symptom and corneal fluo￾rescein staining scores in severe DED and higher goblet cell density
in Sjogren syndrome than did autologous serum € [216], thought to be
due to a higher concentration of growth factors and cytokines.
2.1.2.4. Platelet preparations. Platelets are a reservoir of biologically
active growth factors. Hartwig and colleagues initially suggested
the potential use of platelet preparations to treat ocular surface
disorders [193,194]. Liu et al. compared the growth factor content of
fresh frozen plasma and platelet releasate to that of serum and
evaluated their effects on proliferation, migration and differentia￾tion of corneal epithelial cells, in an in vitro system [237]. They
found that the growth factor content was higher in platelet relea￾sate than plasma or serum, with better cell proliferation, but that
serum had better cellular migration and differentiation owing to its
higher content of fibronectin and vitamins.
There are many different platelet preparations used in clinical
studies, including platelet-rich plasma, plasma rich in growth fac￾tors and platelet lysate. These preparations differ widely in their
method of processing [193,194,237e241].
In a prospective study, Alio and associates reported that the use of
platelet-rich plasma 4e6 times a day in 18 patients with DED led to
an improvement in symptoms in 89% and reduced corneal staining
in 72% of patients after 1 month [242]. Plasma rich in growth factors,
administered 4 times a day to 16 patients with DED, was found to be
effective in reducing symptoms in 75% of patients after 3 months of
treatment [243]. Platelet lysate (30%) applied 4 times a day was
effective in a series of 23 patients with refractory GVHD, with
improvement in corneal fluorescein staining in 70% of patients after
6 months of use [244]. Platelet Rich Plasma improves symptoms and
signs of DED after laser in-situ keratomileusis (LASIK) [242]. How￾ever, the preparation is more complex and the beneficial effects and
indications of using platelet-derived products over serum in the
management of DED have not been addressed in the literature.
2.1.3. Other agents
2.1.3.1. Mucolytics. Mucolytics are a group of substances that
depolymerize mucin and include ambroxol (Mucosolvan® Boeh￾ringer Ingelheim, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany) and bromhexine
that are used in the management of lung complaints that result in
excess mucous production. A small clinical trial in subjects with
Sjogren syndrome demonstrated that oral ambroxol improved €
dryness symptoms [245]. Another mucolytic eye drop, acetylcys￾teine, which also has antioxidant properties [246], has been re￾ported to have a better effect in reducing subjective symptoms of
DED than artificial tears, but had no effect on the objective signs
[247]. In addition, mucolytics can be used for palliative treatment of
filamentary keratitis, which is a potential complication of DED
[248].
2.1.3.2. TRPV1 receptor antagonist. A transient receptor potential
vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1) channel has been found in ocular surface
tissue, which can be activated by hypertonicity to induce pain and
inflammation [249,250]. Topical administration of SYL1001, a short
interfering (si) RNA targeting TRPV1 (at a dose of 1.125% once a
day), produced a significant decrease in symptom scores in subjects
with DED compared with placebo [251]. Selective inhibition of the
production of the TRPV1 receptor may reduce dry eye symptoms
and may provide a novel therapeutic opportunity for the relief of
dry eye, but further research is necessary to investigate this
hypothesis.
2.2. Tear conservation approaches
2.2.1. Punctal occlusion
The concept of temporary or permanent occlusion of one or both
puncta is to retain tears on the ocular surface by blocking their
drainage.
2.2.1.1. Indications and contraindications. Any condition that would
benefit from aqueous retention on the ocular surface is a reasonable
indication for either unilateral [252], or bilateral, punctal occlusion
[253]. These conditions include symptomatic contact lens wear
[254,255], dry eye related to refractive surgery [256e258], ADDE
secondary to a variety of systemic diseases (including Sjogren €
syndrome, GVHD, autoimmune diseases) [259,260], dry eye asso￾ciated with a rapid TBUT [252], systemic medications that reduce
tear film production, superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis [261], any
corneal irregularities or scarring that affect tear stability, lid palsy
or lid closure abnormalities, and toxic epitheliopathy [262].
The use of punctal occlusion in the presence of ocular surface
inflammation is controversial, because theoretically occlusion of
tear outflow could prolong the presence of pro-inflammatory cy￾tokines on the ocular surface and treatment of the inflammation
prior to occlusion is therefore recommended. However, a recent
study showed that punctal occlusion in 29 individuals with mod￾erate DED for 3 weeks resulted in reduced corneal fluorescein
staining and symptom scores, without elevation of cytokine or
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 levels, questioning whether
cytokine levels would necessarily elevate with punctal occlusion
over short periods of use [263].
2.2.1.2. Punctal occlusion with plugs. Punctal occlusion is most
commonly undertaken using punctal plugs. The plug can be located
at the level of the punctal opening or deeper within the canaliculus.
While it is relatively simple to understand the rationale for using
punctal plugs for ADDE, its use in the management of EDE remains
controversial and the results are equivocal as to its effectiveness in
improving meibomian gland status and lipid layer instability
[264e267].
2.2.1.2.1. Types of devices. Punctal plugs are differentiated into
absorbable and non-absorbable devices.
Absorbable devices are temporary inserts that are typically used
as “test” devices to determine the efficacy of occlusion, prior to
permanent occlusion being undertaken. Collagen-based plugs,
which absorb in one to 16 weeks, are the most commonly used
[253,268,269]. Atelocollagen is a collagen solution that is extracted
from animal dermal tissue, from which antigenic telopeptides
attached to both ends of the collagen molecule are eliminated by
pepsin treatment [270]. At temperatures of 4  C or under, atelo￾collagen dissolves in a neutral phosphate buffer solution. If this
solution is injected through the punctum, it turns into a white￾colored gel at body temperature. The injectable atelocollagen
plug has proven successful in a variety of studies [270e272]. Suc￾cinylated collagen plugs [273], and hypromellose 2% [274], may be
promising alternatives for temporary punctal occlusion.
Non-absorbable or “permanent” plugs are often silicone-based
and exist in a wide variety of designs. The Freeman style plug
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 583
consists of a surface collar resting on the punctal opening, a neck,
and a wide base, while the Herrick plug is a cone-shaped intra￾canalicular silicone plug [275]. Some silicone plugs have an interior
channel for partial occlusion, which might permit limited drainage.
The cylindrical SmartPlug™ is an intracanalicular plug made from a
thermolabile polymer that changes size and shape when inserted
into the punctum [276e279]. The FORM FIT® (Oasis Medical,
Glendora, CA, USA) intracanalicular plug is made from an injectable
hydrogel that hydrates in situ over a 10 min period and expands to
conform to the shape of the canaliculus [280], removing the
requirement for selecting a plug of the appropriate size. The plug is
supplied on a pre-loaded inserter that dispenses the plug from
within a polyamide sheath.
In addition to devices, certain types of cyanoacrylate adhesives
can be used for temporary punctal occlusion, prior to determining if
longer-term occlusion is warranted [281,282]. For permanent oc￾clusion, there are a variety of surgical options that can be used, as
described in section 2.2.1.3.
2.2.1.2.2. Complications. The most common complication of
punctal occlusion is spontaneous plug extrusion [265,283e286],
which may occur in as many as 60% of cases [287e289]. Other re￾ported complications include infection [290e292], canalicular
migration of the plug [286,290], pyogenic granuloma, punctal
enlargement [286], and, rarely, tumors [293]. Infections (such as
keratitis, conjunctivitis, canaliculitis or dacryocystitis) occur more
commonly with intracanalicular devices [291,294]. Other less
serious complications, frequently due to the mechanical presence
of the device, include conjunctivitis, subconjunctival hemorrhage,
chemosis, epiphora, punctal erythema, discomfort and foreign
body sensation [294].
2.2.1.3. Surgical punctal occlusion. Permanent surgical closure of
the punctum is typically reserved for patients who are unable to
retain or tolerate punctal plugs. A wide variety of surgical methods
exist [281], including total or partial thermal cauterization
[295e298], punctal occlusion with a conjunctival flap [299] or graft
[300], punctal plug suturing [301], total destruction (extirpation) of
the canaliculus [302], and canalicular ligation [303]. The thermal
methods include cautery, diathermy and use of an Argon laser, and
these may be performed deep within the canaliculus or superfi-
cially on the external portion of the puncta [259,297,298]. Today,
disposable, hand-held thermal cautery is the most widely used
method in clinical practice.
There are currently no Level 1 studies and only a limited number
of Level 2 reports regarding the efficacy of surgical closure of the
puncta for treating DED. Comparative case series have demon￾strated that permanent closure of the puncta by cauterization
significantly improves symptoms, Schirmer scores, corneal fluo￾rescein staining, rose bengal scores and TBUT in patients with
GVHD and Stevens-Johnson syndrome [259,304].
Very few complications are reported with cauterization. Epiphora
can be a potential problem if both the upper and lower puncta are
totally and permanently closed. To avoid this, incomplete occlusion of
the puncta can be achieved with thermal cautery. In patients with
Sjogren syndrome, this partial occlusion technique has resulted in €
improved symptoms, TBUT, conjunctival staining and corneal fluo￾rescein staining [298]. Recanalization can occur, depending on the
technique used and the inflammatory response that occurs, and in
such cases a repeat procedure is necessary to completely close the
punctum [297]. It appears that techniques involving superficial
cauterization have a higher rate of recanalization [305], and that
deeper surgical procedures may increase the success rate [296].
2.2.1.4. Punctal occlusion summary. Punctal occlusion may be most
successful when combined with other DED treatments [306]. A
systematic review of punctal occlusion for DED was conducted by
Ervin et al., which included 7 studies with 305 subjects [307]. The
author's conclusion was that, although punctal plugs provided
symptomatic improvement and clinical outcomes improved from
baseline measures, few studies demonstrated a benefit of punctal
plugs over a comparison intervention. Further, these authors stated
that although the evidence is very limited, the data suggest that
silicone plugs can provide symptomatic relief in severe dry eye and
that temporary collagen plugs appear similarly effective to silicone
plugs on a short-term basis [307].
To date, there are no large scale, Level 1 studies to support the
contention that punctal occlusion of any form is effective in the
management of DED. However, 14 supportive Level 2 studies are
listed in Table 4 [252,257,263,270,272,274,283,308e313].
2.2.2. Moisture chamber spectacles and humidifiers
Moisture chamber spectacles are eyeglasses specially designed
to slow evaporation of the tears, by providing a humid environment
and minimizing airflow over the ocular surface. A number of such
devices are available. While the clinical efficacy of moisture
chamber spectacles has been reported in case reports [314,315], to
date, no high level studies have investigated the therapeutic value
of these devices, but it does appear that they can prove to be a
potential adjunct to prescribed treatment, especially in adverse
environments [316].
Locally placed humidifying devices have also been proposed to
enhance humidity or local air quality. However, only one controlled
study lends support to their effectiveness in the management of dry
eye thus far [317].
2.3. Tear stimulation approaches
Several topical pharmacologic agents that stimulate aqueous,
mucin and/or lipid secretion are commercially available in certain
markets, or under development.
2.3.1. Topical secretagogues
2.3.1.1. Aqueous secretagogues. Diquafosol tetrasodium (Diquas®;
Santen, Osaka, Japan) is approved as an ophthalmic solution at 3%
concentration in Japan and South Korea for the treatment of dry
eye. It is a purinergic P2Y2 receptor agonist that stimulates water
and mucin secretion from conjunctival epithelial cells and goblet
cells, leading to improved tear film stability in dry eye [14,318,319].
Several randomized controlled trials have demonstrated that the
application of topical diquafosol significantly improves objective
markers of DED, such as corneal and conjunctival fluorescein
staining and, in some studies, TBUT and Schirmer scores
[38,320,321]. Diquafosol has potential utility in various specific dry
eye disorders, including Sjogren syndrome € [322], ADDE [323], short
TBUT dry eye [324], MGD [325], dry eye following LASIK [326], and
cataract surgery [327], as well as in contact lens wearers [325].
Recently, Byun et al. demonstrated that diquafosol is effective in
promoting corneal epithelial wound healing and that this effect
may result from epidermal growth factor receptor/extracellular￾signal-regulated kinase stimulated cell proliferation and migra￾tion via P2Y2 receptor mediated intracellular calcium elevation
[328]. In studies in the USA, 2% diquafosol tetrasodium did not
achieve its primary and secondary endpoints and failed to achieve
FDA approval [329].
Lacritin is a glycoprotein that has prosecretory activity in the
lacrimal gland and mitogenic activity at the corneal epithelium and
is reduced in the tears of patients with Sjogren syndrome € [330], and
other forms of dry eye [128]. Topically administered lacritin has
therapeutic potential for the treatment of ADDE [331].
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 584
2.3.1.2. Mucin secretagogues. There are a number of drugs that
specifically target mucin deficiency in DED, including diquafosol
tetrasodium (see section 2.3.1.1).
Rebamipide ophthalmic suspension (Mucosta®; Otsuka Phar￾maceutical, Chiyoda, Japan) is currently approved in Japan for the
treatment of dry eye. It is a mucin secretagogue that promotes the
production of mucin-like glycoproteins in human corneal epithelial
cells, increasing MUC1, MUC4 and MUC16 expression levels through
signals involved in epidermal growth factor receptor activation
[14,332]. In a multicenter, open-label, single-arm study, a total of 154
patients received 2% rebamipide four times per day for 52 weeks
[333]. Lissamine green conjunctival staining, corneal fluorescein
staining, TBUT and subjective symptoms improved significantly at
week 2 compared with baseline, and further improvements were
observed at every visit up to week 52. Topical rebamipide is also
potentially effective in treating other ocular surface disorders such as
short TBUT dry eye [334], lid wiper epitheliopathy [335], and alkali
ocular damage [336,337]. Rebamipide has also proven to be effective
at improving the ocular surface appearance and optical quality in
patients with dry eye undergoing refractive surgery [338]. Although
approved in Japan, phase III trials for rebamipide in the USA failed to
provide the data necessary for FDA approval [329].
Galectin-3, a member of the lectin family, is a carbohydrate￾binding protein that controls multiple biological processes within
the epithelium of the ocular surface. It has been shown that in￾dividuals with DED have a higher concentration of galectin-3 pro￾tein in their tears compared with normals and it was concluded
that the release of cellular galectin-3 into tears was associated with
the development of epithelial damage [339]. The placental extract￾derived dipeptide (JBP485), a dipeptide that promotes galectin-3
production, promotes the expression and secretion of the gel￾forming mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) in rabbit conjunctival epithelium
[340]. JBP485 has also been shown to elevate the expression of
membrane-bound mucins (MUC1/4/16) in rabbit corneal epithe￾lium. JBP485 induced tear secretion in the rabbit model and
resulted in reduced corneal epithelial damage in a mouse dry eye
model. Thus, JBP485 promoted both mucin and aqueous tear
secretion improvements in animal models [340].
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is a lymphocyte inhibitor
commonly used in the treatment of autoimmune diseases and
transplant rejection. It has been reported that a low concentration
of MMF can promote human conjunctival goblet cell proliferation,
and increase messenger RNA (mRNA) production of MUC5AC
in vitro [341], but clinical studies are yet to be undertaken.
Eupatilin is a type of flavonoid. It has potent effects on inducing
secretion of mucins in conjunctival cells, in both in vitro and in vivo
studies, suggesting that it might have potential as a future treat￾ment for DED [342,343].
Trefoil factors are secretory products of mucin-secreting cells. It
has been found that the levels of Trefoil factor family peptide 3
(TFF3) are elevated in the tears of patients with DED. In an in vitro
study, some proinflammatory cytokines, but not hyperosmolarity,
were shown to also induce the production of TFF3, suggesting that
TFF3 could be a potential target for the treatment of DED [344,345].
NGF regulates the growth, proliferation and maintenance of certain
neurons. In an in vitro study, NGF was shown to stimulate conjunctival
epithelial cell differentiation and mucin production [346].
2.3.2. Lipid stimulation
Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) has lipid-stimulating effects
on meibomian gland cells in vitro [347]. Androgens have been
found to upregulate genes involved in lipid metabolic pathways,
and downregulate those related to keratinization, in human mei￾bomian gland epithelial cells in a number of laboratory-based
studies [348e351]. Phase 2 clinical trial results show that treat￾ment of patients with MGD with topical testosterone improves the
quality of meibomian gland secretions and reduces ocular
discomfort [352]. Additional clinical trials for the treatment of MGD
with topical testosterone are currently underway in Europe.
More details on the impact of androgens and IGF-1 can be found
Table 4
Level 2 studies of punctal occlusion in dry eye disease.
Author Subject group N Treatment
duration
(months)
Reported benefits Comments
Balaram et al., 2001
[283]
Dry eye with plug 50 6 Improved symptoms 37% plug loss; more likely
to lose plugs inserted in
upper puncta
Kojima et al., 2002
[308]
Dry eye with silicone plug 51 21 Improved symptoms, epithelial damage 55.9% plug loss
Nava-Castaneda
et al., 2003 [309]
Dry eye with collagen and silicone plug 61 2 Improved symptoms, vital staining
Farrell et al., 2003
[310]
Dry eye with collagen plug 62 0.3 Improved symptoms, tear function Benefit of occluding only
lower puncta
Altan-Yaycioglu
et al., 2005 [311]
Dry eye with collagen and silicone plug 24 Improved tear function Similar results with both
types
Miyata et al., 2006
[272]
Dry eye with atelocollagen plug 28 2 Improved tear function, vital staining, TBUT,
Schirmer score
Chen et al., 2007
[312]
Dry eye with Smart plug 54 13 Improved symptoms, vital staining
Hirai et al., 2012
[270]
Dry eye with atelocollagen plug 37 2 Improved symptoms, ocular surface status
Yung et al., 2012
[257]
Dry eye post-LASIK with plug 18 3 Improved symptoms, tear function
Kaido et al., 2012
[252]
Short TBUT patients with plug 43 1 Improved symptoms, tear function, vital
staining
Shi et al., 2013
[313]
Dry eye with silicone plug 65 6 Improved symptoms, corneal staining, TBUT
and Schirmer score
Capita et al., 2015
[274]
Dry eye SS with hypromellose occlusion 38 2 Improved symptoms, corneal staining and
Schirmer score
Tong et al., 2016
[263]
Moderate dry eye with punctal plug 29 0.75 Improved symptoms, corneal staining No changes in tear
cytokines
LASIK - laser in-situ keratomileusis; N - number of subjects; SS e Sjogren syndrome; TBUT € e tear break up time.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 585
in the TFOS DEWS II Sex, Gender, and Hormones Report [353].
2.3.3. Oral secretagogues
Two orally administered cholinergic agonists, pilocarpine and
cevimeline, are commercially available for the treatment of Sjogren €
syndrome-associated DED. People with Sjogren syndrome have €
autoantibodies that bind to muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in
the exocrine glands and pilocarpine and cevimeline are muscarinic
acetylcholine receptor agonists (parasympathomimetics) that aim
to overcome this effect.
People with Sjogren syndrome treated with oral pilocarpine for €
12 weeks experienced a beneficial effect on symptoms and reduc￾tion in rose bengal staining, but an increase in tear production was
not substantiated [354]. Other studies have shown an improvement
in symptoms, corneal fluorescein staining, rose bengal staining,
goblet cell density and TBUT, but again no improvement in tear
production was shown by Schirmer testing [355,356]. However,
oral pilocarpine was able to increase tear meniscus height (TMH) in
people with Sjogren syndrome € [357]. The most commonly reported
side effect from this medication was excessive sweating, which
occurred in up to 25% of patients [358].
Petrone et al. evaluated the safety and efficacy of 2 doses of cevi￾meline for the treatment of xerostomia and dry eye in patients with
Sjogren syndrome in a 12-week double-masked, randomized, €
placebo-controlled study [359]. Patients taking cevimeline three
times per day had significant improvements in subjective assessment
of ocular dryness, dry mouth, and increased salivary and lacrimalflow
rates [359]. Frequently reported adverse events included headache,
increased sweating, abdominal pain, and nausea [359,360].
The efficacy of oral secretagogues seems to be greater in the
treatment of oral dryness than ocular dryness [361,362]. Patients
with Sjogren syndrome have been found to be more likely to €
continue cevimeline than pilocarpine on a long-term basis due to
fewer reported side effects with cevimeline. Therapeutic failure of
one secretagogue did not predict similar results with the other,
with second time users more likely to continue long-term treat￾ment [358].
2.3.4. Nasal neurostimulation
Neuromodulation is a therapeutic strategy that involves inter￾facing directly with the nervous system through electrical, elec￾tromagnetic, chemical, or optogenetic methodologies [363,364].
The goal is the long-term activation, inhibition, modification, and/
or regulation of neural input to correct organ or tissue dysfunction
and manage disease symptoms. The nasolacrimal reflex upregu￾lates tear production following chemical or mechanical stimulation
of the nasal mucosa [365,366]. The nasolacrimal reflex arc begins in
the sensory nerves lining the nasal cavity (the afferent arm) and
terminates with the parasympathetic innervation of key target
tissues that contribute to tear production (the efferent arm) [367].
In a prospective, case-control study in patients with normal tear
production, anesthetizing the nasal mucosa was shown to reduce
basal tearing by 34% compared with a saline control [368].
An intranasal tear neurostimulator has been developed to
induce normal tear production via stimulation of the nasolacrimal
reflex. This device consists of a hand-held stimulator unit equipped
with a disposable two-pronged hydrogel tip and an external
charger. The intranasal tear neurostimulator allows self-delivery of
minute electrical currents to the anterior ethmoidal nerve, thereby
stimulating immediate natural tear production in patients with
DED [366]. Forty subjects with mild-to-severe DED used a proto￾type intranasal tear neurostimulator in an open-label, single-arm,
non-randomized, 180-day pilot study [369]. Subjects were
instructed to perform stimulation with the device 2 times per day
or more, as needed. At day 180, stimulation with the device
significantly increased mean Schirmer scores compared to unsti￾mulated basal tear production scores. At the end of the follow-up
period, mean conjunctival staining and symptom scores were
significantly reduced from baseline. Preliminary results have also
shown a positive effect of the neurostimulator on goblet cell
function [370].
The TrueTear™ Intranasal Tear Neurostimulator (Allergan,
Parkway Parsippany, NJ, USA) was recently cleared by the FDA with
an approved indication for providing a temporary increase in tear
production during neurostimulation in adult patients. A number of
other studies are ongoing and results are awaiting publication
[371,372].
2.3.5. Various tear stimulation methods
A variety of other novel methods to stimulate tear production
have been reported. These include abdominal breathing for 3 min,
which reportedly increased the tear meniscus volume in healthy
women [373].
Corneal cold thermoreceptors are activated by drying of the
ocular surface and stimulation of these receptors could increase
tear production [374,375]. The existence of Transient Receptor Po￾tential Cation Channel, Subfamily M, Member 8 (TRPM8) on the
nerve terminals of the cold thermoreceptors on the cornea is
consistent with the finding that their stimulation by menthol and
cool temperatures could increase tear production [376,377]. Finally,
caffeine, probably the most widely consumed psychoactive sub￾stance, appears to stimulate tear secretion in healthy, non-dry eye
subjects [378].
3. Treatments for lid abnormalities
3.1. Anterior blepharitis
3.1.1. Lid hygiene
Appropriate lid hygiene is important in the management of a
variety of lid conditions that result in dry eye (particularly ble￾pharitis) and, if used appropriately, can reduce lipid by-products
and lipolytic bacteria associated with these conditions [379e385].
Lid scrubs using a mild dilution of baby shampoo applied with a
swab or cotton bud have been the most widely accepted therapy
[382,386,387]. A recent Level 1 study demonstrated the efficacy of
lid scrubs for removal of crusting in anterior blepharitis, with both a
commercial lid cleanser and dilute baby shampoo [388]. However,
relative to the baby shampoo, the dedicated lid cleanser showed
reduced ocular surface MMP-9 levels, improved lipid layer quality
and was better tolerated. Baby shampoo was further reported to be
associated with a reduction in ocular surface MUC5AC levels, sug￾gesting that baby shampoo may have an adverse effect on goblet
cell function [388]. In preference to using baby shampoo, there are
now a wide variety of proprietary lid cleansing products available,
which utilise a diversity of delivery mechanisms, including scrubs,
foams, solutions, and wipes; their individual description is outside
the scope of this review.
The report of the TFOS MGD Workshop reported that “lid hy￾giene is widely considered an effective mainstream therapy for
MGD and blepharitis” [389]. However, compliance with following
lid hygiene instruction is notoriously poor. A recent cross-sectional
study of 207 subjects who were prescribed lid hygiene procedures
(daily warm compresses and eyelid scrubs) found that only 55%
were compliant after 6 weeks of use [390].
Despite the fact that various professional organisations suggest
ways to clean the eyelids, to date, there are no universally accepted
guidelines for lid cleansing and peer-reviewed evidence for such
advice is lacking, suggesting that this is an area worthy of study.
Caution should be exercised when cleaning lids that have make-up
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 586
on them, to avoid subsequent contamination of the ocular surface
[391e393].
Table 5 reports Level 2 studies related to lid cleansing methods
and their impact on blepharitis or dry eye (combinations with other
pharmacological treatments are not included) [386,387,394e400].
3.1.1.1. Bacterial overcolonisation
3.1.1.1.1. Topical antibiotics. Lid hygiene to reduce the bacterial
load on the lid margin is commonly undertaken in the management
of DED associated with blepharitis [401]. However, achieving this
through prescribing topical antibiotic drops or ointment (such as
fusidic acid) alone is not commonly recommended over the longer
term, but is adopted by some practitioners [402] and a short dose of
a topical antibiotic has been recommended in consensus-based
reports [403]. A recent Level 2 study demonstrated that an
ofloxacin-based ointment was valuable in the management of pa￾tients with obstructive MGD. Topical azithromycin (a macrolide
antibiotic) has been used in the management of DED, but it is
believed to have an anti-inflammatory action rather than simply
reducing the bacteria lid flora (see Section 4.5). More Level 1 studies
are required to examine the potential for prescribing topical anti￾biotics alone in managing DED.
3.1.1.2. Demodex infestation. Demodex infestation is a causative
factor in many cases of intractable blepharitis and is often associ￾ated with dry eye symptoms [404], although there is currently no
evidence to show a direct association with the development of
MGD [389]. Historically, the treatment of ocular Demodex included
a wide variety of products, most of which had no high level evi￾dence to support their use. These included topical 2% metronida￾zole gel [405,406], 1% mercury oxide ointment [407], and 4%
pilocarpine gel [408]. More recently, appropriate management has
been found with the use of topical products containing tea-tree oil
or oral ivermectin, as summarized in Table 6 [409e415].
3.1.1.2.1. Tea tree oil. Tea tree oil (TTO) is a natural, essential oil
from steamed Melaleuca alternifolia leaves (from the narrow-leaved
Paperbark or Tea tree, which is native to Australia) that exhibits
antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antifungal, and antiviral proper￾ties [416], and is toxic to Demodex [417]. In a Level 2 clinical study, a
weekly lid scrub with 50% TTO accompanied by a daily lid scrub
with tea tree shampoo was more effective at eradicating ocular
Demodex than a daily lid scrub with a 50% concentration of baby
shampoo [417]. However, TTO can be toxic to the eye and causes
ocular stinging and irritation if used in its pure form. The active
component of TTO is 4-Terpineol [418,419], and pre-formulated
wipes are now commercially available that are equivalent to 25%
whole TTO. These reduce the risk of toxicity to the ocular surface
compared with using stronger concentrations of TTO. Several
studies have shown a considerable reduction in the number of
Demodex on the eyelashes after treatment with TTO
[409,410,413,414,417].
To date, very limited information exists in relation to the posi￾tive impact of TTO on dry eye symptoms and signs [420], and more
studies are needed on this topic.
3.1.1.2.2. Ivermectin. Ivermectin is a broad-spectrum antipara￾sitic drug primarily used to treat strongyloidiasis and control
onchocerciasis. It is a low cost, single dose medication that is very
well tolerated by patients. One oral dose of ivermectin has been
shown to successfully reduce the number of Demodex found
adjacent to the lashes of patients with blepharitis [411,412]. Per￾formance has been improved by combining the use of ivermectin
with metronidazole [415], or with permethrin cream [421]. More
studies are needed to confirm the role of ivermectin for treating
DED symptoms and signs.
3.2. Meibomian gland dysfunction
The 2011 definition of MGD by the TFOS MGD Workshop high￾lighted the importance of terminal duct obstruction in MGD [2],
which has encouraged the use of treatments to remove obstruction
from the terminal duct and ductal system of the meibomian glands.
Thus, there exists a significant role for conventional treatments in
the management of MGD, including ocular lubricants, lid hygiene
and warm compresses.
3.2.1. Ocular lubricants
As MGD results in decreased lipid layer thickness, it may be
beneficial to replace the lipids with ocular lubricant eye drops or
sprays that contain lipids. A number of studies have found an
improvement in signs and symptoms with the use of lipid-based
drops in dry eye (Table 7) [65,141,142,157,182,422e427]. A Level 1
study has confirmed increased lipid layer thickness grade and
NIBUT in normal eyes treated with a liposomal spray [178]. To
enhance the potential performance of lipid-based drops, nano￾Table 5
Level 2 studies of lid hygiene in dry eye disease.
Author Subject group N Lid hygiene variations Treatment duration
(months)
Reported benefits
Paugh et al., 1990
[394]
MGD 21 Lid scrub þ massage 0.5 Improved TBUT
Key et al., 1996
[386]
Chronic blepharitis
(80% wore CL)
25 Lid scrub vs hypo-allergenic bar soap 4 Improved symptoms and lid
appearance
Romero et al., 2004
[387]
MGD 37 Lid hygiene þ heated saline þ AT 1.5 Improved symptoms and TBUT
Guillon et al., 2012
[395]
Blepharitis and MGD 40 Lid hygiene with wipes (Blephaclean) 3 Improved eyelid margin status
Guillon et al., 2012
[396]
Blepharitis and MGD 40 Lid hygiene with wipes (Blephaclean) 3 Improved symptoms
Doan et al., 2012
[397]
Chronic blepharitis 33 Lid hygiene with cleansing solution
(Blephagel)
0.75 No changes in TBUT and VA; routine
was well tolerated
Khaireddin et al.,
2013 [398]
Chronic blepharitis and
contact lens wear
53 Lid hygiene (baby shampoo) 1 Improved symptoms
Arrua et al., 2015
[399]
Chronic blepharitis 45 Lid hygiene neutral shampoo 2 Improved symptoms and signs
Ngo et al., 2017
[400]
DED 20 Combination of AT, lid cleanser (TheraTears
SteriLid) and oral omega-3 supplements
(TheraTears Nutrition)
3 Improved symptoms and signs
AT e artificial tears; CL e contact lens; MGD e meibomian gland dysfunction; N - number of subjects; TBUT e tear breakup time; VA e visual acuity.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 587
technology concepts have been incorporated into lipid emulsion
eye drops [147,428].
3.2.2. Warm compresses
Despite the proven efficacy of warm compresses in many clinical
studies, compliance is often poor due to the time required and the
difficulty in maintaining the temperature of the compress for an
extended period of time [389,390,429e432]. One method to extend
the length of time over which a facecloth can retain heat is to wrap
several cloths around each other in a bundle format [433].
The ability for heat from a warm compress to soften or liquefy
the secretions in obstructed glands in the case of MGD is supported
by Level 2 and 3 evidence [433e436]. The temperature and time
required for melting obstructive material within the meibomian
gland excretory duct has not been definitively established. Pre￾liminary evidence from multiple studies has reported a range of
melting points (32 -45  C) for the contents of the meibomian
glands, reflecting in part that meibum is a highly complex lipid
Table 6
Level 2 studies related to management of Demodex and dry eye disease.
Author Subject group N Treatment variations Treatment
duration
(months)
Reported benefits
Kheirkhah et al., 2007
[409]
Chronic blepharitis with ocular
Demodex
6 TTO 50% weekly lid scrub þ daily
TT shampoo
2 Reduced Demodex count,
improved ocular irritation and
inflammatory corneal signs
Gao et al., 2007 [410] Ocular Demodex 11 TTO 50% weekly lid scrub þ daily
TT shampoo
1 Reduced Demodex count
Holzchuh et al., 2011 [411] Refractory blepharitis with ocular
Demodex
12 Oral ivermectin 1 Reduced Demodex count,
improved
tear functions
Filho et al., 2011 [412] Chronic blepharitis with ocular
Demodex
19 Oral ivermectin 3 Reduced Demodex count
Koo et al., 2012 [413] Ocular Demodex 106 TTO daily lid scrub 1 Reduced Demodex count,
improved
ocular comfort
Gao et al., 2012 [414] Ocular Demodex 24 TTO 5% ointment massage 1 Reduced Demodex count,
improved
ocular itching
Salem et al., 2013 [415] Ocular/skin Demodex 30 Oral ivermectin vs
ivermectin þ metronidazole
1 Reduced Demodex count
N - number of subjects; TT e tea tree; TTO e tea tree oil.
Table 7
Studies of lipid-containing eye drops in dry eye disease.
Author Evidence
Level
Patient group N Treatment
duration
Reported benefits Comments
Korb et al., 2005 [141] 2 Mild to severe DED 40 Single
drop of
each type
Increased LLT emulsion > aqueous drop Test 1 ¼ oil-in-water emulsion, Test
2 ¼ aqueous eye drop
Scaffidi et al., 2007 [142] 2 Mild to severe DED 41 Single
drop of
each type
Increased LLT Test 1 and 2 ¼ two oil-in-water emulsions
Maissa et al., 2010 [157] 3 10 DED, 5 normals 15 Single
drop
Improved symptoms, castor oil detected up to
4 h post eye drop instillation
Test ¼ oil-in-water emulsion
McCann et al., 2012 [422] 1 Mild to moderate
EDE
75 90 days Improved symptoms, evaporation,
increased lipid layer and TBUT
emulsion > sodium hyaluronate, decreased
corneal staining and osmolarity with
emulsion
Test 1 ¼ aqueous drop with sodium
hyaluronate, Test 2 ¼ aqueous drop with
HMPC, Test 3 ¼ oil-in-water emulsion
Tomlinson et al., 2013 [65] 1 Mild to moderate
DED, age and sex￾matched controls
38 2 weeks Improved OSDI, evaporimetry, TBUT,
osmolarity
Test 1 ¼ aqueous eye drop,
Test 2 and 3 ¼ two oil-in-water emulsions
Sindt et al., 2013 [423] 2 Mild to moderate
MGD
49 4 weeks Improved symptoms, corneal staining, TBUT,
meibomian expression
Test ¼ oil-in-water emulsion
Aguilar et al., 2014 [424] 1 Mild to moderate
EDE
49 4 weeks Improved TBUT, corneal staining, conjunctival
staining, meibomian expression
Test ¼ oil-in-water emulsion,
control ¼ sodium chloride
Kaercher et al., 2014 [425] 3 Mild to severe
ADDE, EDE and
mixed DED
1209 4 weeks Improved symptoms, OSDI,
TBUT, Schirmer score, decrease in severity of
dry eye
Test ¼ oil-in-water emulsion
Guthrie et al., 2015 [426] 1 Symptomatic
contact lens
wearers
106 1 month Improved comfort, wearing time, lid wiper
epitheliopathy, corneal staining
emulsion > control drops
Test ¼ oil-in-water emulsion,
control ¼ non-lipid containing contact lens
drops
Simmons et al., 2015 [182] 1 Mild to moderate
DED (2 with SS)
288 3 months Improved subjective dryness symptoms,
OSDI, TBUT
Test 1, 2, 3 ¼ three oil-in-water emulsions
Ousler et al., 2015 [427] 2 Moderate to severe
DED
42 2 weeks Improved symptoms, corneal staining,
conjunctival staining, conjunctival redness
Test ¼ oil-in-water emulsion
ADDE - aqueous deficient dry eye; DED - dry eye disease; EDE - evaporative dry eye; HPMC - hydroxypropyl methylcellulose; LLT - lipid layer thickness; MGD e meibomian
gland dysfunction; N - number of subjects; OSDI e Ocular Surface Disease Index; SS e Sjogren syndrome; TBUT - tear breakup time. €
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 588
mixture [434,435,437e439]. Meibomian gland material causing
severe obstruction has a higher melting point than material from
less obstructed glands [434,437,440]. Level 2 and 3 evidence sug￾gests that heating the individual meibomian gland to a temperature
of  40 C is likely to be required for optimal warm compress
treatment [433,437,441]. The 40 C recommendation refers to the
temperature of the palpebral conjunctiva and the gland, not the
temperature on the contact surface of the treatment device or the
temperature of the external skin of the eyelids.
Arita and colleagues evaluated the impact of 5 commercially
available eyelid-warming devices in 10 subjects with MGD and 10
controls over a 2e4 week period [442]. The 5 devices consisted of 2
dry (non-moist) methods and 3 moist methods. A single applica￾tion of all 5 devices improved symptom scores, increased TBUT and
increased ocular surface temperatures, but only for up to 30 min.
The moist devices resulted in “wetness” of the surface of the eyelid
skin, resulting in evaporative cooling that tended to limit the
beneficial effects of lid warming. Their results showed that
repeated eyelid warming with a non-moist device improved tear
film function in normal individuals and may have beneficial effects
on both tear film and meibomian gland function in MGD patients.
They concluded that repeated non-moist warming for 2 weeks or 4
weeks was required to achieve a stable improvement in normals
and in those with MGD respectively [442].
A prospective, randomized, contralateral eye study recom￾mended that warm compresses, heated to 45  C, should be applied
to the outer lid for a minimum of 5 min. Optimal contact between
the compress and eyelid should be achieved and the compresses
should be replaced every 2 min to ensure the temperature is
maintained [443]. Several preliminary studies on non-dry eye
participants have investigated the effect of different warm com￾presses on eyelid temperature [433,444]. All of the compresses
showed an increase in temperature at the lower lid conjunctival
surface and none caused any damage to the eyelids. However, only
the continuous layered application of warm bundled towels heated
in a microwave was able to maintain a temperature of 40  C on the
lower lid conjunctival surface [433]. This study concluded that a
wet surface improved heat transmission through the lid and should
be used versus dry treatments [433]. Care should be taken not to
heat the eyelid skin to more than 45  C to avoid thermal damage
[445,446]. Fortunately, a safeguard is the individual's pain
response, that protects against extensive thermal damage to the
eyelid skin as a patient will not tolerate a cloth that is excessively
hot [447].
Of possible concern is the heating of the cornea from approxi￾mately 36  C to 39.4  C after approximately 8 min [448]. If eye
rubbing occurs when the corneal temperature is elevated, corneal
deformation and visual blur can result [449]. The risks of ocular
massage with elevated corneal temperature have been deemed to
require patient instruction on how to optimally perform the pro￾cedure [448,450].
A study of subjects with MGD showed that 12 weeks of lid
warming therapy resulted in a therapeutic benefit, with excess
ocular surface phospholipase activity (which is detrimental to tear
film stability) being reduced [451].
In addition to homemade compresses, a wide variety of devices
are now commercially available for the management of lid anom￾alies that will raise the lid temperature for a longer period of time
[431,432].
3.2.2.1. Blephasteam. Blephasteam® (Thea Pharmaceuticals, New￾castle under Lyme, UK) resembles a swimming goggle and is
plugged into an electrical outlet to provide latent heat, without
pressure, on the eyelids. A moistened insert is placed into each
sealed watertight chamber to provide a warm, high humidity
environment over each eye. A preliminary study on normal subjects
found that the device increased the temperature of the eyelids
[433], and a study on dry eye patients reported that tear film
evaporation was reduced 32% immediately after treatment [452].
Two randomized, controlled, investigator-masked studies found
greater efficacy with Blephasteam® than with warm towel treat￾ment [429,453] and a randomized, investigator-masked, crossover
study conducted on healthy volunteers found Blephasteam®
warmed the lower eyelid for a significantly longer period of time
than warm compresses [453]. Visual acuity also significantly
improved after use of Blephasteam® [453]. Two prospective, non￾randomized studies found improved symptoms in patients with
MGD [430,454] and increased TBUT. Decreased acinar diameter and
area were also observed in individuals unresponsive to warm
compress treatment [430].
3.2.2.2. MGDRx EyeBag®. The MGDRx EyeBag® (The EyeBag Com￾pany, West Yorkshire, UK) is a reusable warm compress, consisting
of a cotton and silk bag containing flax seeds, that is heated in a
microwave for 30 s. Studies conducted in normal eyes found the
MGDRx EyeBag® achieved higher ocular temperatures than another
heating mask [455], and also maintains heat longer than a simple
heated face cloth in both in vitro and in vivo studies [431,432]. A
randomized, investigator-masked, contralateral study reported an
improvement in symptoms after using MGDRx EyeBag® twice a day
for two weeks [456]. The benefits lasted for up to 6 months, with
occasional retreatment sessions leading to greater comfort.
3.2.2.3. EyeGiene® mask. The EyeGiene® mask (Eyedetec Medical,
Danville, CA, USA) uses disposable pressure-activated warming
units [455]. A randomized, controlled, examiner-masked study
found the EyeGiene® mask was similar in efficacy to a warm towel,
but not as effective as Blephasteam® [429] or as effective in raising
ocular temperature as a flaxseed-based eye mask [457].
3.2.2.4. Infrared warm compression device. The infrared warm
compression device consists of an eye mask with two rigid patches
over the eyes. Each patch has 19 light emitting diodes, emitting near
infrared radiation from 850 to 1050 nm, with a peak at 940 nm. The
infrared warm compression device was used to treat 37 subjects
with obstructive MGD in a prospective, non-comparative interven￾tional case series for 5 min, twice a day, for 2 weeks with closed
eyelids. Total subjective symptom scores improved and there was
also significant improvement in tear evaporation rates during forced
blinking, fluorescein and rose bengal staining and meibomian gland
orifice obstruction score [458].
3.2.3. Physical treatments
The purpose of applying physical treatment to the meibomian
glands is to improve and/or restore the function of the glands by
ameliorating or removing ductal obstruction, thus allowing the
glands to become functional [459]. Physical expression for thera￾peutic amelioration of obstructive material should not be confused
with diagnostic expression, where minimal forces are used to
determine if the gland is functional [441].
There are three established methods for physically treating
ductal obstruction; warm compresses and various heating devices
use heat to raise the temperature to soften or preferably liquefy the
obstructive material, physical force is used to compress the glands
to physically express the material from the obstructed gland, and
intraductal probing introduces a thin wire into the obstructed
orifice and then uses force to expel the obstructive material.
3.2.3.1. Forceful expression. There is a long history describing a
variety of methods for forceful expression of the meibomian glands
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 589
without the application of heat [460e462]. These methods include
isolating the eyelid to be expressed between the examiner's fingers
and applying force by squeezing the eyelids against each other, or
utilizing a rigid object on the inner surface of the eyelid and the
thumb or finger or another rigid object on the outer lid to apply
force [460,463]. However, a limiting factor with all these methods is
pain experienced by the patient, which is only minimally relieved
by topical anesthetics. The amount of pain increases rapidly as the
force of expression exceeds 5 pounds per square inch (PSI) [464].
The usual maximal tolerable force is 15 PSI, which is frequently
marginal or inadequate to express obstructive material [464].
A study investigated the efficacy of four in-office forceful ex￾pressions over a period of 6 months in conjunction with daily warm
compress therapy [461]. The number of expressible glands, quality
of secretion and lipid layer thickness significantly improved and all
patients reported improved comfort and decreased symptoms
associated with DED [461].
3.2.3.2. LipiFlow. LipiFlow® TearScience, Morrisville, NC, USA) was
designed to bypass the impediments to heat transfer through the
eyelid tissue and simultaneously evacuate the gland contents,
while heating the glands to therapeutic levels of 42.5  C [459,465].
It has been demonstrated, in both randomized controlled and un￾controlled clinical trials, that the single 12-min procedure of the
LipiFlow® system is safe and effective for treating MGD and that the
effect can be sustained [465]. The first prospective, open-label,
randomized, crossover, multicenter study compared a single Lipi￾Flow® treatment to daily warm compress therapy [459]. The group
undergoing LipiFlow® treatment showed a significant improve￾ment in symptoms, meibomian gland secretion and TBUT at one
month, while the warm compress group showed improvement
only in symptoms. After receiving the crossover treatment, the
warm compress group also demonstrated significant improvement
in gland function and TBUT.
More recently, a prospective, randomized, crossover, observer￾masked clinical trial, compared a single LipiFlow® treatment to a
robust 3 month regime of twice-daily warm compresses combined
with both lid massage and lid hygiene [72]. These subjects were
evaluated for six months, demonstrating that a single LipiFlow®
treatment performs at least as well as the rigorous twice-daily
hygiene, heat and massage regime and that the effects of the sin￾gle LipiFlow® treatment were sustained for six months [466]. A
more recent prospective, multicentre, open-label 12 month clinical
trial randomized 200 subjects (400 eyes) and reported that the
single LipiFlow® treatment effect, with improved gland function
and dry eye symptoms, can be sustained for up to 12 months [467].
An uncontrolled single center, observational study found signifi-
cant and sustained improvement in meibomian gland function and
symptoms for up to 3 years after a single treatment [468].
3.2.3.3. Intense pulsed light (IPL). Intense pulsed light (IPL) has
been used in dermatology to deliver intense pulses of non-coherent
light from 500 nm to 1200 nm in wavelength to treat various
conditions, including skin pigmentation, sun damage and acne
[469]. A hand held computer-controlled flashgun delivers the
appropriate light, which is filtered for specific action.
IPL was first reported anecdotally over 15 years ago for the
treatment of MGD. A more recent prospective, double-masked,
placebo-controlled, paired-eye study compared the effect of mul￾tiple pulses of IPL on one eye while the other eye received a sham
treatment. The treatment imparted an improvement in tear film
quality and a reduction in symptoms [470]. A retrospective analysis
of medical records has independently shown a 77% improvement in
meibomian gland function in at least one eye and an 89%
improvement in dry eye symptoms when IPL was used in
combination with manual meibomian gland expression [471]. A
retrospective multicentre cohort review of 100 patients with MGD
treated with IPL showed similar clinical improvements and
concluded that IPL therapy was a safe and effective treatment for
EDE [472].
3.2.3.4. Intraductal probing. Intraductal meibomian gland probing
was first described in 2010 [473]. This initial publication reported
data from a retrospective chart review of 25 consecutive patients
who all had signs and symptoms of obstructive MGD. Immediate
post-probing relief was experienced by 24 of the 25 patients and all
patients had relief from symptoms by 4 weeks after the procedure.
Five patients required one or two retreatment sessions. The pa￾tients who underwent a single treatment were followed up on
average at 11.5 months post treatment. All of the patients were
symptom free at their last follow-up visit [473]. A prospective,
longitudinal study performed probing on one eye of 16 individuals
presenting with MGD, while the fellow eye was used as a control.
Break-up time, vision, pain and photophobia all improved at one
week and 6 months post-treatment [474]. A study of three patients
with refractory obstructive MGD investigated the amount and
change in meibum viscosity after probing. All patients showed
improvements in lipid levels and viscosity and 2 of the 3 showed
improved TBUT [475]. A study also reported improvement in
symptoms after probing for 10 patients with ocular rosacea, MGD,
and surface disease refractory to conventional management.
Symptoms improved in approximately 50% of subjects at 1 and 6
months, doxycycline was discontinued in 9 of 10 patients and all
patients reported decreased use of ocular lubricants [476].
While further research is indicated, especially in view of the
invasive nature of the procedure, the possibility of damage to a
complex ductal system and the small sample of subjects thus far
reported on, the data reported suggest that intraductal probing
may offer relief to MGD patients who are unresponsive to con￾ventional treatment.
3.2.3.5. Debridement scaling. One of the primary mechanisms
driving obstruction of the meibomian glands is hyperkeratinization
of the eyelid margin and duct orifices [477]. As keratinized material
is built up around and within the orifice, the gland is obstructed and
meibum cannot be delivered from the gland to the tear film.
Debridement of the line of Marx, which marks the mucocutaneous
junction and the keratinized lid margin, was first reported in 2013
[478]. It is believed that this technique works by mechanically
removing accumulated debris and keratinized cells from the eyelid
margin to allow increased flow of meibum into the tear film. The
prospective, investigator-masked study by Korb and colleagues
included a test group of 16 subjects and a control group of 12 sub￾jects, all presenting with symptoms of dry eye and visible changes to
the line of Marx [478]. The stained line of Marx and the entire width
of the keratinized lower lid margin were debrided in the test group
using a stainless steel golf spud. One month post-treatment, sig￾nificant improvements in symptoms occurred in 22% of subjects and
in MG function occurred in 46% of subjects [478]. A prospective,
randomized, unmasked, controlled pilot study to determine the
effect of lid debridement in subjects with Sjogren syndrome was €
recently published [479]. All 14 subjects were female, seven were
randomized to the treatment group and seven were controls. One
month after debridement scaling subjects reported improved
symptoms, ocular staining was reduced, and re-establishment of
meibomian gland function was demonstrated [479].
A lack of sham treatment and masking in both reported studies
[478,479] must be considered. Larger studies and additional study
designs are needed to confirm the mechanisms of action to explain
the positive results reported to date.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 590
3.3. Blinking abnormalities and ocular exposure
Incomplete blinking or an inability to close the eyes fully during
sleep can result in drying of the ocular surface [480e482], and thus
appropriate measures to address any blink or lid closure abnor￾malities are worthy of consideration in the management of the
patient with signs or symptoms of DED.
Further details on the impact of abnormal blink patterns and eye
closure on DED are detailed in the TFOS DEWS II Pathophysiology
Report [483].
3.3.1. Treatment for corneal exposure
Studies investigating treatments for any form of inadequate lid
closure are mostly Level 3 [481,484e487], and include the evalu￾ation of tear supplements, ointments (typically instilled at night),
moisture goggles, night time eyeshields that achieve mechanical
closure of the lids, and forced temporary closure of the lids by
patching or taping. For those unwilling or unable to perform eyelid
physical taping overnight, such as those with contact dermatitis or
those concerned with iatrogenic lash epilation [481,484], alterna￾tive methods exist. These methods include eyecups of a variety of
different designs and materials, and the use of thin polymer films
(such as plastic food wrap). Level 1 evidence suggests that films
provide better protection to the exposed cornea, with fewer com￾plications, than lubricants [488]. Mechanical closure of the eyelids
by various methods in critically ill populations is reported to
equally, or better, protect the exposed cornea, with fewer compli￾cations, than lubricants [488,489]. However, although it is univer￾sally accepted that mechanical closure of the eyelids is mandatory
in the management of severe exposure keratopathy, there are no
randomized prospective controlled clinical studies to establish the
efficacy or superiority of different treatments.
Persistent or severe cases of corneal exposure may require one
of a variety of surgical procedures, including implantation of upper
lid weights [481,490,491], lid springs, lid reconstruction or partial/
complete tarsorrhaphy. Rigid gas permeable scleral lenses can also
be an option in cases of exposure keratitis, as detailed in section
3.3.3.2.
3.3.2. Entropion and ectropion
Entropion and ectropion result in ocular surface exposure and
entropion often results in concurrent trichiasis, causing symptoms
of dry eye [492]. Facial nerve palsy results in a paralytic lower lid
ectropion and upper eyelid retraction due to reduced activity of the
orbicularis oculi. Other causes include trauma, tumors, facial sur￾gery and age-related lid laxity.
Management of both entropion and ectropion is usually surgical
and techniques include tightening the canthal tendons and
removing a cicatrix or other mechanical reason for eyelid malpo￾sition [493e497]. In a Level 2 study, correction of entropion
improved vision, punctate keratopathy and TBUT, but not Schirmer
results [498]. A further Level 2 study showed that tarsorrhaphy was
a successful procedure for entropion and supported epithelial
healing in severely dry eyes [499].
3.3.3. Contact lenses
Contact lens use for the correction of refractive error in healthy
eyes may be accompanied by symptoms of dryness and discomfort
and the options to manage such discomfort have been addressed in
detail elsewhere [500]. Despite their association with dryness,
contact lenses have a potential role in the management of DED. In
the framework of the original TFOS DEWS report, contact lens use
was listed with permanent punctal occlusion and serum tears as
options for more advanced DED [1]. The main reason that contact
lens wear was reserved for management of more severe forms of
DED is to acknowledge that OSD and contact lens wear are each risk
factors for microbial keratitis, although the compounded risk factor
is unknown. The mechanism by which contact lens wear is thera￾peutic has yet to be elaborated in detail, but relevant aspects
include mechanical protection and reduction in corneal
desiccation.
The decision to use a contact lens in the therapeutic manage￾ment of DED must take into consideration the risks and benefits of
the individual case. Reports of microbial keratitis occurring in pa￾tients fitted with contact lenses in the management of OSD have
emerged [501], including cases that progressed to endophthalmitis
[502]. Contact lenses worn for severe DED are often used on an
extended wear basis, which is associated with an increased risk of
microbial keratitis relative to daily wear [503e506].
The management of DED can be undertaken with either soft or
rigid lenses. Depending upon the severity and nature of the OSD,
therapeutic soft contact lenses, which are often termed bandage
contact lenses, can be prescribed for short-term (days) or long-term
(years) use and may be worn on either a daily wear or extended
wear schedule.
3.3.3.1. Therapeutic soft contact lenses (bandage lenses). The pur￾pose of a bandage contact lens is to improve ocular comfort and
reduce the effects of an adverse environment. The availability of
silicone hydrogel soft lens materials, with high oxygen trans￾missibility, has encouraged the application of these devices for the
therapeutic management of OSD, and they are typically used on an
extended wear basis [507].
Bandage contact lenses are considered a useful adjunctive
management option for a range of ocular surface pathologies,
including recurrent corneal erosion [508], corneal abrasion [509],
bullous keratopathy [510], and after corneal surgery [511e514]. It
has been suggested that bandage contact lenses may stabilize the
tear film and assist with the restoration of epithelial cell turnover
[515], and potentially aid in the management of corneal pain by
insulating sensitized corneal nerves from environmental stimula￾tion [516,517]. The exact mechanism by which a bandage soft lens
relieves pain has not been elucidated, but likely involves direct
shielding of nociceptors at the ocular surface or support of cellular
structure and extracellular matrix elements that serve a shielding
role. A protective effect may arise in preventing drying or cooling of
the ocular surface or in shielding the ocular surface nociceptors
from lid and tarsal conjunctival related trauma, for example in
cicatrising disease. The use of soft bandage contact lenses for DED is
supported by Level 3 evidence that pain relief with bandage soft
contact lenses can be achieved in corneal diseases other than DED
[518], for example, when there is nociceptive pain after trauma and
surgery [519].
There is currently a relative dearth of literature relating to the
specific application of bandage contact lenses for the management
of DED. A recent prospective, randomized (Level 1) study of 40
subjects with Sjogren syndrome that compared the ef € ficacy of
bandage contact lenses to autologous serum concluded that sili￾cone hydrogel contact lenses (worn as a bandage contact lens),
were effective in the management of Sjogren syndrome-associated €
DED [223]. After six weeks, subjects fitted with bandage contact
lenses had a significant improvement in best-corrected visual
acuity (which remained stable for up to six weeks after dis￾continuing contact lens wear) and significantly improved OSDI
scores, compared with subjects treated with autologous serum.
Both intervention groups also showed relative improvements in
quality of life scores, tear break-up time and corneal staining,
compared with baseline; there were no adverse events observed in
either group. Furthermore, in a Level 2 study involving seven pa￾tients with GVHD and moderate to severe DED, the use of silicone
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 591
hydrogel lenses, worn on a seven-night continuous wear basis for
one month, was found to reduce dry eye symptoms and improve
visual acuity compared with pre-treatment [515].
Timely treatment of any corneal epitheliopathy is considered
important for minimizing the risk of developing chronic pain; once
there has been centralization of neuropathic pain, a bandage con￾tact lens, which might reduce peripheral signalling, may be insuf-
ficient for reducing symptoms [516].
3.3.3.2. Rigid gas permeable scleral lenses. There is increasing
appreciation that daily wear of a rigid gas permeable scleral lens
may play an important role in the management of moderate to
severe DED, possibly due to the fact that they can provide a re￾pository of tears between the lens and the ocular surface. The use of
scleral lenses has been investigated in other conditions such as
chronic GVHD [520e522], and Stevens-Johnson syndrome [523].
Use of a scleral lens as a prosthetic device in a series of patients,
including those with OSD, was first reported from the United States
in 1990 [524], with similar reports emerging from around the world
that same decade [525,526]. A case series (Level 3 evidence) has
described the long-term application of scleral contact lenses as an
alternative to tarsorrhaphy in three patients who had developed
unilateral lagophthalmos and corneal anesthesia secondary to
post-surgical facial nerve paralysis [527]. The scleral lens modality
was reported to provide effective protection to the ocular surface
and optimize visual function in these patients. The use of scleral
lenses for OSD is more widely reported in a variety of reviews
[528e530].
Recent clinical studies report success in the management
of DED with scleral lenses, mini-scleral lenses and PROSE
(Prosthetic Replacement of the Ocular Surface Ecosystem)
[520,522,527,531e538].
4. Anti-inflammatory therapy
4.1. Topical glucocorticoids
Corticosteroids are successfully used in the treatment of a wide
range of inflammatory diseases, including DED.
4.1.1. Basic research
Desiccating stress can induce ocular surface damage and
generate innate and adaptive immune responses. These inflam￾matory cascades lead to further ocular surface damage and the
development of a self-perpetuating inflammatory cycle. Inflam￾mation can also cause alterations to the neurobiology of the ocular
surface, as described in the TFOS DEWS II Pain and Sensation Report
[539].
Steroids have been found to be useful in neural pain modulation,
which may be beneficial in managing neuropathic pain, but this
modulation has not been evaluated in the eye [540]. It is clear from
numerous experimental studies in animal models that topical
corticosteroids are effective in breaking the vicious cycle of im￾mune responses in DED. Topical methylprednisolone (1%) treat￾ment suppressed MMP-9 and inflammatory cytokine expression
and mitogen-activated protein kinase activation in the corneal
epithelium of experimental murine dry eye. As a result, desqua￾mation of apical corneal epithelial cells was decreased and the
integrity of corneal epithelial tight junctions was maintained
[541,542]. In DED induced by intralacrimal gland injection of bot￾ulinum toxin-B in a mouse model, topical 0.1% fluorometholone
alone or in combination with cyclosporine A, was able to partially
restore tear production and significantly improve the ocular surface
[543]. Murine studies have explored new therapeutic agents for
DED. One study showed that a significant decrease in corneal
fluorescein staining was observed after topical treatment with 1%
methylprednisolone, 5% interleukin (IL)-1R antagonist, and 0.05%
cyclosporine A [544]. A significant decrease in the numbers of
central corneal CD11bþ cells, corneal lymphatic growth, and
corneal IL-1b expression were also demonstrated after treatment
with IL-1R antagonist and methylprednisolone, which were not
observed after treatment with the vehicle [544].
Selective glucocorticoid receptor agonists can also be used as a
therapeutic target for DED. In the atropine-induced dry eye rabbit
model, selective glucocorticoid receptor agonists and 0.1% dexa￾methasone were fully efficacious, maintaining tear volume and
breakup time [545]. Both agents showed no effects on intraocular
pressure (IOP) or body weight, whereas dexamethasone significantly
increased IOP and inhibited the increase of body weight due to muscle
wasting [545]. Furthermore, selective cyclooxygenase-2/eicosanoid￾prostanoid receptor (COX-2/EP receptor) inhibition is suggested as a
therapeutic target in a murine DED model [546]. Topical COX-2/EP
receptor inhibitors reduce the number of CCR7þCD11bþ cells on the
ocular surface with inhibition of cellular lymph node homing and
suppression of Th17 driven immune responses. Dry eye-induced loss
of conjunctival goblet cells was reversed, and corneal erosion was
improved by each topical treatment [546].
4.1.2. Clinical studies
A number of topical corticosteroid preparations can be used to
modulate anterior segment inflammation and multiple studies
have shown the clinical value of their short-term use in managing
DED. Several RCTs have been published investigating the value of
using various corticosteroid formulations in the management of
DED (Table 8) [547e557].
Of recent interest is that imaging (rather than clinical evalua￾tions typically associated with dry eye assessment) may also be
valuable in establishing the predictive potential for the manage￾ment of DED with topical corticosteroids [555,558].
4.1.3. Complications
While it appears that topical corticosteroids may be valuable in
the management of DED, their long-term use is not without risk of
complications. These include ocular hypertension, cataracts and
opportunistic infections, even after short periods of use [547]. For
patients with moderate-to-severe disease that is not controlled
with other therapies, repeated short-term pulse therapy of corti￾costeroids can be an alternative approach. Fifty-three patients with
Sjogren syndrome were treated with topical non-preserved 1% €
methylprednisolone 4 times a day for 2 weeks, and then re￾evaluated and tapered off the medication until they demon￾strated no corneal fluorescein staining or symptoms [559]. Most
patients were in a disease-free state for a relatively long period (57
weeks) after the first pulse therapy, and 11 individuals (21%)
experienced a recurrence of either symptoms or signs. After the
second pulse therapy, a disease-free period of 72 weeks was
observed and only 1.9% of patients had a recurrence. No serious
complications (such as IOP elevation or cataract formation) were
encountered during the entire follow-up period [559].
The use of topical steroids such as fluorometholone and lote￾prednol may also be considered, which have a lower likelihood of
increasing IOP and inducing cataract formation [560e562]. How￾ever, even fluorometholone has been reported to cause cataract
after a continuous 4-month application period [563]. A recent
retrospective safety study, listing 77 published studies, concluded
that topical treatment with loteprednol etabonate has minimal
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 592
effect on IOP when used in the treatment of a wide range of ocular
surface and intraocular inflammatory disorders, including ocular
allergy, DED, anterior uveitis, penetrating keratoplasty, endothelial
keratoplasty, and postoperative pain and inflammation following
ocular surgery [564].
4.1.4. Steroid pre-treatment
In a prospective, double-masked, multicenter RCT, 0.5% lote￾prednol therapy two weeks before the initiation of long-term
topical 0.05% cyclosporine provided more rapid improvement in
Schirmer score, corneal fluorescein staining, lissamine green
staining, and symptoms, than topical cyclosporine or artificial tears
alone [554]. Loteprednol etabonate induction therapy significantly
decreased the incidence of severe stinging and discontinuation of
topical cyclosporine [554]. Similarly, treatment with topical 1%
methylprednisolone and cyclosporine for an initial three-week
period provided faster symptom relief and improvement in ocular
signs than topical cyclosporine alone [565].
4.1.5. Preservative-free options
It has become accepted that preservative use in DED is
damaging to the ocular surface [98,566,567], and thus the use of
preservative-free topical steroids is growing. In a randomized,
parallel-group, case-control study, the efficacy of preservative-free
0.1% HA and 0.1% fluorometholone combined with 0.05% cyclo￾sporine was compared with the efficacy of preserved 0.1% HA and
0.1% fluorometholone combined with 0.05% cyclosporine, in treat￾ing DED [118]. The preservative-free eye drops improved subjective
symptoms, TBUT, Schirmer score and impression cytology findings
more than preserved eye drops [118]. Similarly, a retrospective re￾view of 31 patients treated with preservative-free 0.01% topical
dexamethasone showed a significant subjective improvement in
symptoms in 84% of the subjects with chronic ocular surface irri￾tation, and/or tearing, refractory to various preserved topical ste￾roids, including 0.2% loteprednol, 0.1% fluorometholone and 1%
prednisolone [553]. Further details on this topic are covered in the
TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic Dry Eye Report [102].
Table 8
Level 1 and 2 studies of topical corticosteroids for managing dry eye disease.
Author Subject group/Drug N Treatment
duration
Reported benefits Comments
Marsh &
Pflugfelder, 1999
[547]
SS. Non-preserved 1%
methylprednisolone
21 2 weeks Improved symptoms, corneal staining,
filamentary keratitis
Retrospective case series. Prolonged
treatment for up to 6 months resulted
in increased IOP and cataracts
Sainz de la Maza
Serra et al., 2000
[548]
SS. Non-preserved 1%
methylprednisolone
15 2 months Improved symptoms, corneal staining Prospective. 15 subjects treated with
punctal plugs post corticosteroid.
Further 15 subjects also treated with
punctal plugs alone.
Avunduk et al.,
2003 [549]
KCS with or without SS. 3 groups: ATS
only; ATS plus NSAID (flurbiprofen);
ATS plus topical corticosteroid (0.1%
FML)
32 1 month ATS plus corticosteroid group had
improved symptoms, reduced CFS and
rose bengal staining, improved goblet
cell appearance and reduced
inflammatory cells
Prospective, Single-masked, RCT
Pflugfelder et al.,
2004 [550]
KCS. 0.5% loteprednol etabonate vs
vehicle
64 1 month Improved symptoms and hyperemia in
more severe subjects
Prospective, double-masked, placebo￾controlled, RCT. No increase in IOP over
placebo
Lee et al., 2006
[551]
KCS. 0.1% prednisolone drops in one
eye and 0.1% HA drops in the other
41 1 month Improved symptoms, NGF levels and
impression cytology scores in
prednisolone-treated eyes only
Prospective, double-masked, RCT
Yang et al., 2006
[552]
KCS. 0.1% FML 30 1 month Improved symptoms, CFS, Schirmer
score, tear breakup time, conjunctival
hyperemia
Prospective, non-masked
Jonisch et al., 2010
[553]
OSD. 0.01% dexamethasone
(unpreserved)
31 3 months 65% reported moderate or complete
resolution of symptoms, 22% had mild
improvement and 13% had no change in
symptoms. No relevant elevation in IOP.
Retrospective chart review
Sheppard et al.,
2014 [554]
Mild to moderate DED. Loteprednol
etabonate (LE) or ATS before the
initiation of topical cyclosporine A
(CsA) therapy
61 6 weeks LE pre-treatment significantly reduced
CsA stinging. Both groups showed
significantly improved OSDI scores,
with LE showing more OSDI
improvement. Both pre-treatment
strategies improved symptoms,
Schirmer scores, CFS, lissamine staining,
and adjunctive ATS use.
Prospective, multicenter randomized
double-masked parallel group
Kheirkhah et al.,
2015 [555]
KCS due to MGD. 3 groups: ATS only;
loteprednol etabonate 0.5%;
loteprednol etabonate
0.5% þ tobramycin 0.3%
60 1 month Subjects treated with ATS or
loteprednol alone with near-normal
baseline subbasal nerve fiber
demonstrated significant improvement
in symptoms and CFS
Prospective, double-masked, RCT
Lin & Gong, 2015
[556]
SS. 0.1% FML and 0.1% HA vs 0.5% CsA
and 0.1% HA
40 2 months Improved symptoms, CFS, conjunctival
hyperemia, GCD, TBUT (FML > CsA)
Prospective, parallel-group, RCT
Pinto-Fraga et al.,
2016 [557]
KCS. 0.1% FML vs PVA ATS 41 21 days Subjects treated with FML maintained
the status of their ocular surface after
exposure to the adverse environment;
those treated with PVA tears had
notable impairment in corneal and
conjunctival staining and hyperaemia
Prospective, double-masked, placebo￾controlled, RCT. Included 2 h adverse
environment exposure
ATS e artificial tear solution; CFS e corneal fluorescein staining; CsA e cyclosporine A; FML e fluorometholone; GCD e goblet cell density; HA e hyaluronic acid; IOP e
intraocular pressure; KCS e keratoconjunctivitis sicca; MGD e meibomian gland dysfunction; N - number of subjects; NGF e nerve growth factor; NSAID - nonsteroidal anti￾inflammatory drops; OSD e ocular surface disease; OSDI e ocular surface disease index; PVA e polyvinyl alcohol; SS - Sjogren's syndrome; TBUT € e tear break up time.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 593
4.1.6. Sex steroids
A considerable body of basic science and clinical research has
investigated the roles of sex steroids (androgens, estrogens and
progestins) in the regulation of ocular surface tissues and the
adnexa. Clinical studies have also explored the efficacy of these
hormones in the treatment of DED. This information is detailed in
the TFOS DEWS II Sex, Gender, and Hormones Report [353].
4.2. Non-glucocorticoid immunomodulators
With the exception of cyclosporine, comparatively few clinical
trials have been performed using immunomodulating medications
in individuals with DED, but demonstration of efficacy within this
therapeutic group offers potentially important clues into disease
pathogenesis, and may stimulate further research that could lead to
commercial development of compounds that may offer demon￾strable patient benefit.
4.2.1. Cyclosporine A
The initial TFOS DEWS report noted the importance of ocular
surface inflammation not only in the development of, but as a
downstream effect and propagator of, DED, and reviewed a range of
therapies that function, at least in part, by anti-inflammatory
mechanisms of action [1].
Cyclosporine is understood to be an immunomodulatory drug
with anti-inflammatory properties, as well as having other actions
relevant to managing DED [568e570]. Cyclosporine is a fungal
antimetabolite that inhibits IL-2 activation of lymphocytes [570]. It
is used systemically as an anti-rejection treatment in patients with
organ transplants [571,572], and in autoimmune diseases [573,574],
as well as topically in the treatment of allergic, atopic, limbal stem
cell dysfunction and autoimmune ocular inflammatory disease
[575e578]. Topical cyclosporine was approved by the FDA for the
treatment of moderate-to-severe DED in 2003, based on an
improvement in tear production measured by the Schirmer test in
15% of patients, compared to 5% of vehicle-treated controls. Treat￾ment with cyclosporine reduces many markers of inflammation
[579,580] and also reduces elevated tear osmolarity [63]. Cyclo￾sporine also has anti-apoptotic effects relevant to the known
reversal of the normal epithelial cell/leukocyte relationship in DED
[581,582], an effect not produced by corticosteroid treatment
[583e585]. Additionally, cyclosporine treatment has been reported
to result in recovery of reduced goblet cell density in the con￾junctiva of subjects with DED [586,587].
A number of Level 1 [588e591] and Level 2 [592,593] studies
(Table 9) and several meta-analyses [594e597] (Table 10) have
been published that support the efficacy of cyclosporine in the
management of DED. However, the outcome measures (both
symptoms and signs) and grading scales differ substantially among
these studies, which complicates comparisons of the published
work. Nonetheless, taken as a body of work, there is strong Level 1
evidence to support the use of topical cyclosporine in the treatment
of DED. However, there are a number of exclusions and caveats. It is
important to note that cyclosporine A has been reported to lack
efficacy in treating DED from surgical procedures, contact lens use
and in thyroid orbitopathy and furthermore has demonstrated
amelioration of ocular surface damage in only 53% (9/17) of the
randomized clinical trials [595].
Quality of life studies have concluded that topical cyclosporine is
cost-effective for the treatment of DED as compared to the use of
ocular lubricants [598]. A Level 1 study has also reported the ad￾ditive value of topical cyclosporine therapy in patients fitted with
punctal plugs [306]. Fewer studies have differentiated between
ADDE patients and those with EDE, but several Level 1 studies
[599e602] (Table 11) have reported positive results (again, with
varied outcome measures and scales) following treatment with
cyclosporine for evaporative DED/MGD.
Treatment of patients with DED using topical cyclosporine
needs to be continued for extended periods of time, as evidenced
by the rarity of a clinical “cure” (absence of symptoms following
drug discontinuation) [603]. The poor water solubility of cyclo￾sporine makes it difficult to formulate into a topical ocular drop. A
novel formulation of cyclosporine 0.1% in an unpreserved single￾dose cationic emulsion was recently released in Europe [604]. The
active drug formulation was superior to vehicle for change in
corneal fluorescein staining from baseline and inflammation
reduction, as evidenced by human leukocyte antigen D-related
(HLA-DR) response, over 6 months, but there was no symptom
change over time by OSDI and 29% of subjects still experienced
discomfort on instillation, compared with 9% of subjects using
vehicle [604].
4.2.2. Tacrolimus
Tacrolimus, a macrolide produced by Streptomyces tsukubaensis,
was discovered in 1984 in Japan while searching for new immu￾nosuppressive and cancer chemotherapeutic agents. Like cyclo￾sporine, it blocks T-lymphocyte activity, but its immunosuppressive
potential is higher than that of cyclosporine [605].
In an open-label, prospective study with 14 patients with GVHD
with severe DED and intolerance to topical cyclosporine, patients
were instructed to instill 0.03% topical tacrolimus once a day for
three months [606]. Dry eye symptoms and signs improved
Table 9
Level 1 and Level 2 studies of topical cyclosporine for the management of dry eye disease.
Author Subject group N Treatment
duration
(months)
Reported benefits Comments
Level 1 studies
Baiza-Duran et al., 2010 [588] Moderate to severe DED (Hispanics) 183 3.5 Improved dryness, tearing, FBS, TBUT, corneal
staining, Schirmer score
Aqueous solution 0.1% and 0.05%
Chen et al., 2010 [589] Moderate to severe DED (Chinese) 233 2 Improved dryness, FBS, corneal staining,
Schirmer score
Emulsion formulation with BAK
Su et al.,
2011 [590]
Mild to severe DED 100 6 Improved OSDI, TBUT, corneal staining,
conjunctival staining, Schirmer score
Once daily vs. twice daily dosage
Deveci et al., 2014 [591] SS 26 1 Improved pain, burning, TBUT, Schirmer score
Level 2 studies
Salib et al., 2006 [592] Post LASIK DED 42 3 Improved Schirmer score
Perry et al., 2008 [593] Mild, moderate and severe DED 158 3 Improved OSDI, TBUT, Schirmer score, corneal
staining, conjunctival staining
BAK e benzalkonium chloride; DED e dry eye disease; FBS e foreign body sensation; LASIK e laser in-situ keratomileusis; N - number of subjects; OSDI - ocular surface disease
index; SS - Sjogren syndrome; TBUT - tear break up time. €
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 594
significantly with tacrolimus and the authors concluded that
topical 0.03% tacrolimus may be a viable alternative for patients
with intolerance to topical cyclosporine or in patients where the
response to topical cyclosporine is poor. In a prospective, double￾masked study of 0.03% topical tacrolimus instilled twice daily in
24 patients with Sjogren syndrome-related dry eye, the average €
corneal fluorescein staining and rose bengal scores improved sta￾tistically after seven days of treatment and continued to improve
over 90 days [607]. The Schirmer and TBUT values were unchanged
up to 21 days post-treatment, but did show an improvement after
28 days of treatment, relative to baseline.
4.2.3. Non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
A variety of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
have been used for DED treatment, including 0.1% pranoprofen
[608], 0.1% diclofenac [609,610], 0.4% ketorolac [611], and 0.1%
indomethacin [610]. The osmoprotective effect of different NSAIDs
was evaluated by Sawazaki et al. in a rat model [612]. Diclofenac
was able to suppress hyperosmolarity-induced apoptosis and cell
growth arrest. In contrast, bromfenac did not exert such a protec￾tive action.
Clinical trials have shown that the use of NSAIDs is followed by a
reduction in ocular discomfort in patients with DED [613]. How￾ever, sporadic case reports of corneal melting in individuals with
severe DED have been published [614]. Thus, most published
studies with NSAIDS in DED have a duration of no more than 1
month [608,611,613], despite DED being a chronic disease. The ef￾fect of NSAID treatment on corneal sensitivity in normal subjects
and in patients with DED has been studied. The results of these
trials seem to demonstrate that some NSAIDs, diclofenac in
particular, have the effect of reducing corneal sensitivity both in
normal subjects and in subjects with dry eye [615]. Therefore, it has
been suggested that NSAIDs should be used with caution in pa￾tients with Sjogren syndrome € [610,616].
In a single-masked, randomized, prospective clinical trial on 32
KCS patients, with or without Sjogren syndrome, Avunduk et al. €
investigated whether anti-inflammatory drops (corticosteroids and
NSAIDs) have therapeutic effects [549]. Subjects randomized to
receive artificial tears plus topical corticosteroidal drops had
significantly lower symptom severity scores, corneal fluorescein
staining and rose bengal staining, and HLA-DR positive cells on
days 15 and 30 compared with subjects in control groups. The
authors concluded that topical corticosteroids, but not topical
NSAIDs, had a beneficial effect on symptoms and signs in moderate￾to-severe DED [549].
4.2.4. Biologics
4.2.4.1. Lubricin. Lubricin (proteoglycan-4) is a lubricating, mucin￾like glycoprotein that was first identified in synovial fluid [617].
More recently, lubricin has been discovered on the ocular surface
and in the meibomian glands [618]. It is a highly effective friction￾reducing boundary lubricant, at both synthetic and tissue surfaces,
functions synergistically with HA [619e621] and possesses anti￾inflammatory properties [622e624]. Lubricin has been shown to
reduce friction and prevent shear stress at the cornea-lid interface,
while lubricin deficiency leads to increased shear stress and corneal
staining [618]. Full-length recombinant human lubricin has
recently been generated and characterized in vitro [625].
Currently, no lubricin-based lubricants are commercially avail￾able. A recent two-week, randomized, double-masked, parallel
group study in 39 subjects with moderate DED compared a topical
formulation of recombinant human lubricin to a 0.18% HA eye drop
[626]. Recombinant human lubricin was found to demonstrate
significant improvement in both signs and symptoms of DED
compared to HA, with significant improvements in a number of
clinical variables, including TBUT, corneal fluorescein staining and
eyelid and conjunctival redness.
4.2.4.2. Recombinant human nerve growth factor (RH-NGF).
NGF is involved in the regulation of growth, proliferation and sur￾vival of neurons and is found naturally in tears [627e629]. NGF has
been reported to have trophic effects on the ocular surface, through
activation of tropomyosin receptor kinase A (TrkA) and p75 neu￾rotrophin receptor [630]. NGF and TrkA are expressed throughout
the ocular surface, including corneal epithelial cells and sensory
neurons [631,632].
Topical application of NGF may enhance the production and
functional characteristics of the tear film by improving corneal
sensitivity, with an improvement of ocular surface signs in dogs
with surgically-induced dry eye [633]. In humans, corneal
Table 10
Published meta-analyses of topical cyclosporine for the management of dry eye disease.
Author # reviewed/
total # pts
Symptom benefit Signs benefit Comments
Alves et al., 2013 [594] 6 studies/1514 In all studies In all studies
Sacchetti et al., 2014 [595] 18 studies/
2479
Improved symptoms in
100% of studies,
Improved Schirmer score in 72%, corneal staining in
53%, TBUT in 47%
Great heterogeneity in grading scales,
duration of treatment
Zhou et al., 2014 [596] 12 studies/
1660
Improved OSDI Improved Schirmer score with anesthesia, TBUT
Wan et al., 2015 [597] 12 studies/
1367
Improved OSDI, TBUT, corneal staining, Schirmer score
without anesthesia, GCD
DED - dry eye disease; GCD e goblet cell density; TBUT - tear break up time; OSDI - Ocular Surface Disease Index.
Table 11
Level 1 studies of topical cyclosporine treatment for the management of evaporative dry eye/meibomian gland dysfunction.
Author N Treatment
duration
(months)
Symptom benefit Signs benefit
Perry et al., 2006 [599] 33 3 Lid inflammation, MG inclusions
Rubin et al., 2006 [600] 30 3 Visual blur, burning, itching Schirmer score, TBUT, secretion quality
Schechter et al., 2009 [601] 37 3 OSDI TBUT, Schirmer score, corneal staining
Prabhasawat et al., 2013 [602] 70 3 OSDI TBUT, lid inflammation, MG expressibility
MG e meibomian gland; N - number of subjects; OSDI - ocular surface disease index; TBUT e tear break up time.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 595
sensitivity, tear production and visual acuity improvement has also
been observed after topical administration of murine-derived NGF
eye drops (at a concentration of 200 mg/ml every 2 h for 2 days
followed by one drop six times daily until the ulcer healed) [634]. A
study in rabbits showed that some of these improvements may be
due to nerve regeneration. This study showed that topical NGF sped
up the recovery of the subbasal nerve plexus after LASIK surgery
[635].
Tavilermide (MIM-D3) is a small-molecule NGF peptidomimetic
that increases tear and mucin-like fluids and reduces corneal
fluorescein staining in a rat model of dry eye [14,636]. In a Phase 2
randomized clinical trial studying the effect of topical MIM-D3 in
patients with DED after exposure to a Controlled Adverse Envi￾ronment chamber to exacerbate dry eye severity, MIM-D3 1%
reduced corneal fluorescein staining and conjunctival lissamine
green staining after 28 days of treatment when compared to pla￾cebo [637]. Similarly, MIM-D3 5% reduced the symptoms of ocular
dryness when compared to placebo. In patients with more severe
symptoms, both MIM-D3 1% and 5% concentrations showed a sig￾nificant reduction in symptoms compared to placebo [637]. How￾ever, it should be noted that the MIM-D3 clinical trial did not meet
its pre-specified primary endpoints with respect to total corneal
fluorescein staining and worst symptom score [637].
4.2.4.3. Tumor necrosis factor a-stimulated gene/protein-6 (TSG-6).
Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) suppress inflammation in
animal models of myocardial infarction, corneal injury and peri￾tonitis [638e640]. It has been proposed that MSCs reduce inflam￾mation through secretion of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a￾stimulated gene/protein-6 (TSG-6), which has shown therapeutic
effects in experimental models of corneal inflammation [641e643].
In a study that investigated the effect of TSG-6 in murine models of
dry eye and Sjogren syndrome, topical application of TSG-6 €
improved tear production, reduced corneal fluorescein staining,
and increased goblet cell density when compared to phosphate
buffered saline-treated controls [644]. Additionally, TSG-6 reduced
the levels of IL-2, interferon-gamma (IFN-g), IL-1b, and IL-6 in the
intraorbital gland. On the ocular surface, TSG-6 significantly
reduced the levels of IL-2, IFN-g, IL-1b, and IL-6 when compared to
controls [644]. In a comparative study evaluating the effects of
topical administration of TSG-6, cyclosporine and prednisolone in a
mouse model of dry eye, TSG-6 showed a similar effect to cyclo￾sporine and prednisolone, resulting in improved tear production
and goblet cell density [642]. Additionally, TSG-6 and cyclosporine
had a similar effect, reducing corneal fluorescein staining and
repressing the levels of IFN-g and TNF-a on the ocular surface and
within the lacrimal gland [642].
4.2.4.4. Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra). Interleukin-1 re￾ceptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) is a protein produced mainly by activated
monocytes and tissue macrophages, but also epithelial cells. This
protein inhibits the pro-inflammatory action of IL-1a and IL-1b by
competitively blocking their binding to the IL-1 cell receptor 1 (IL-
1R1); when IL1-Ra binds IL-1R1 there is no signalling generated,
hence it is an IL-1 antagonizing ligand [645e647]. The IL-1Ra gene is
generally upregulated in inflammatory states [646]. Treatment with
topical human recombinant IL-1Ra reduces inflammation in animal
models of ocular surface inflammation [647e650]. In a murine model
of dry eye, topical treatment with IL-1Ra was more effective than
CMC in reducing lissamine green staining and increasing tear
secretion. Topical IL-1Ra also reduced aberrant acidification of goblet
cell mucins and pathological keratinization [651]. In a study that
compared the effects of topical IL-1Ra, cyclosporine and methyl￾prednisolone in mice with dry eye, the reduction of corneal fluo￾rescein staining was comparable among the three treatments.
However, only IL-1Ra and methylprednisolone reduced the number
of central corneal CD11b þ cells, corneal lymphatic growth and the
corneal expression of corneal IL-1b [544]. In a Phase 2 randomized
clinical trial that evaluated the effects of topical IL-1Ra (anakinra;
Kineret®) and vehicle three times a day for 12 weeks, treatment with
IL-1Ra 2.5% significantly reduced corneal fluorescein staining when
compared to baseline values, and significantly reduced symptoms
when compared to the vehicle [652]. Additionally, treatment with IL-
1Ra induced complete bilateral corneal fluorescein staining clearance
in 29% of subjects, compared to 7% in subjects treated with the
vehicle.
4.2.4.5. Anti tumor necrosis factor-a therapy (TNF- a). TNF-a is a
cytokine with pro-inflammatory and co-stimulatory effects in
multiple cell types; it regulates immune cell trafficking and acti￾vation [653,654]. TNF-a expression is elevated in the conjunctiva
and tear fluid in animal models and in patients with Sjogren syn- €
drome and other types of DED [655e657]. Some studies have
evaluated the effect of systemic treatment with TNF-a blocking
agents such as infliximab and etanercept, with conflicting results
being reported [658e661]. A further study, which compared topical
infliximab and balanced salt solution to treat mice with induced dry
eye, showed that mice treated with infliximab had increased tear
volume and decreased levels of conjunctival inflammatory cyto￾kines IL-1b, IL-6, IL-17, and IFN-g, as well as improved goblet cell
density [662]. Researchers have also shown that both TNF-a
blockers HL036 and etanercept decreased inflammation in the
lacrimal gland and cornea of mice with experimentally-induced dry
eye by suppressing IFN-g, IL-21, and IL-6 [663].
4.2.4.6. Anti Interleukin-17 (IL-17) therapy. Th17 cells have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of numerous autoimmune diseases.
An increased expression of Th17-associated cytokine IL-17 has been
demonstrated to promote disruption of the corneal epithelial bar￾rier, thus playing a role in the pathogenesis of DED [664e666]. In an
in vivo model of dry eye, treatment with IL-17 antibody significantly
reduced corneal fluorescein staining in mice [665]. Another study
showed that antibody neutralization of IL-17 in mice with experi￾mental dry eye ameliorates corneal epithelial barrier dysfunction
(reducing fluorescein permeability) and expression of MMP-3 and
MMP-9 [666]. Additionally, treatment with anti-IL-17 antibody has
been shown to significantly reduce lymphangiogenesis in mice
with dry eye, which may aid in reduction of DED-related immunity
[667].
In summary, biologic molecules hold a promising future in the
treatment of DED. However, although many biologics have been
thoroughly investigated in animal models, human studies remain
scarce and well-designed human trials are required to further
assess their therapeutic role.
4.2.5. Neuropeptides
Substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), neuro￾peptide Y (NPY) and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) have been
evaluated in a variety of lab-based studies and clinical studies on
normal eyes and in DED. The decreased tear levels of NPY and CGRP
in DED are related to impaired lacrimal function [629]. These
findings suggest that NPY and CGRP could become useful bio￾markers and have therapeutic activity in dry eye [629,668].
The effect of VIP has been tested on immortalized human mei￾bomian gland epithelial cells [669]. The cells transcribe and
translate VIP and mACh receptors; VIP activates the adenylyl
cyclase pathway; VIP increases intracellular [Ca2þ] in meibomian
gland cells; and VIP stimulates meibomian gland cell proliferation
when combined with forskolin.
Most of the studies investigating neuropeptides to date have
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 596
been performed in moderate and severe neurotrophic keratitis
with concomitant DED, but not directly in individuals with DED
[670].
4.2.6. Conclusions
The range of mechanisms of action of the medications discussed
in this section, that have at least some demonstrable efficacy in the
treatment of patients with DED, gives some insight into the com￾plex pathophysiology of this disease. Clearly, further research is
warranted.
4.3. Lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) antagonist
One strategy to inhibit or decrease T cell mediated inflammation
in DED is to prevent T cells from interacting with other immuno￾logically active cellular elements. Integrins are heterodimeric cell
surface receptors, ubiquitous in a variety of cellular and physiologic
processes, including cell adhesion, migration and activation, steps
crucial for T cell activity and survival [671]. Of the 24 known
integrin heterodimers, the b2 subfamily of integrins is found only
on lymphocytes [671]. Lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1
(LFA-1) is a member of this integrin family. The primary ligand for
LFA-1 is the intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), expressed
on a variety of cells, including endothelial and epithelial cells and
antigen presenting cells [672]. Binding between LFA-1 and ICAM-1
has been described as the “immunologic synapse” and a critical
step in the pathway toward T cell activation [673].
4.3.1. Lifitegrast
Lifitegrast is a small molecule integrin antagonist, engineered to
mimic ICAM-1's binding domain to LFA-1 and believed to act as a
competitive antagonist to block binding between LFA-1 and ICAM-
1, resulting in inhibition of T cell migration into target tissues,
reduction of cytokine release, and reduction of further T cell
recruitment [674e676].
Lifitegrast 5% ophthalmic solution has been studied as a topical
treatment for DED and five clinical trials have been published to￾date. In a Phase 2 clinical trial on 230 patients [677], a significant
response was observed for the pre-specified secondary endpoints
of mean change from baseline to day 84 in inferior corneal staining
and for a vision-related function subscale, but not for the primary
efficacy endpoint of mean inferior corneal staining. In a Phase 3
clinical study (OPUS-1), involving 588 subjects with DED [678], a
significant response was reported in the primary efficacy variable of
mean change from baseline to day 84 in inferior corneal staining as
well as other secondary efficacy endpoints (total corneal staining
and conjunctival lissamine green staining). However, the study did
not meet the co-primary endpoint for symptoms (the vision￾related function subscale of OSDI), though significant improve￾ment was reported for treated subjects in several secondary effi-
cacy symptom endpoints. A second Phase 3 clinical study, OPUS-2,
reported results from 718 participants treated with lifitegrast 5% or
placebo over 84 days [679]. In this trial, significant improvement
was reported in the primary efficacy endpoint (change from base￾line to day 84 in Eye Dryness Score; visual analog scale) as well as
the secondary symptom endpoint of ocular discomfort. However,
improvement was not observed in lifitegrast-treated subjects in the
co-primary endpoint of mean change from baseline to day 84 in
inferior corneal staining, in contrast to the results from OPUS-1. The
SONATA long-term safety study reported on 331 patients treated
with lifitegrast twice daily or placebo for 350 days [680]. Lifitegrast
appeared safe and well tolerated with no serious ocular adverse
events reported and a safety profile that was similar to that of the
previously published studies.
Taken together, these Level 1 studies demonstrated the efficacy
of lifitegrast, and the FDA approved Xiidra™ (lifitegrast 5%
ophthalmic solution Shire, Lexington, MA, USA) in a single dose
unit format, in July 2016, for the treatment of both signs and
symptoms of DED.
4.4. Inflammatory modulation with systemic and topical antibiotics
4.4.1. Tetracycline therapy
Tetracycline and its analogues (minocycline, doxycycline) are
broad-spectrum antibiotics that inhibit protein synthesis by
inhibiting the binding of aminoacyl-tRNA to the mRNA-ribosome
complex. It is hypothesized that a decrease in bacteria-producing
lipolytic exoenzymes [681,682], and inhibition of lipase produc￾tion [683], with resultant decrease in meibomian lipid breakdown
products, may contribute to improvement in clinical parameters in
MGD and anterior blepharitis associated with DED. These agents
also have anti-inflammatory properties. They decrease the activity
of collagenase, phospholipase A2, and several MMPs, and decrease
the production of inflammatory mediators such as IL-1 and TNF-a
in a wide range of tissues, including the corneal epithelium
[541,542,684e686]. In experimental murine models of dry eye,
topically applied doxycycline was found to preserve corneal
epithelial smoothness and barrier function [541,542], and to alle￾viate ocular surface inflammation [687]. Similarly, minocycline
decreases the production of diglycerides and free fatty acids in
meibomian secretions [681]. However, evidence exists to suggest
that doxycycline, tetracycline and minocycline do not duplicate the
ability of azithromycin to stimulate differentiation and lipid accu￾mulation in human meibomian gland epithelial cells [688].
Tetracycline and its analogues are often used to treat disorders
that are associated with DED such as acne rosacea, MGD and ble￾pharitis. Doxycycline and minocycline achieve a higher concen￾tration in tissue and have a lower renal clearance, longer half-life
and higher level of binding to serum proteins than tetracycline and
oxytetracycline [689], and are often prescribed in cases of ocular
inflammatory diseases because of these properties.
Rosacea, including its ocular manifestations, is an inflammatory
disorder that occurs mainly in adults, with peak severity in the
third and fourth decades. Evidence exists to suggest that it is
strongly correlated with MGD [690] and that Demodex infestation
may be associated with its development [691e694]. Strong evi￾dence exists that topical azelaic acid, ivermectin, brimonidine,
doxycycline and isotretinoin, and oral tetracyclines (doxycycline
and minocycline) are effective treatments for rosacea [695,696].
However, strong evidence also exists to show that isotretinoin
destroys human meibomian glands and induces keratinization of
the meibomian gland ducts [477,697], and thus its topical use for
treatment of the ocular surface may not be advisable.
Tetracycline and its analogues have been shown to reduce
subjective symptoms and hyperemia associated with ocular rosa￾cea in small clinical case series [698,699], with a single daily dose of
doxycycline as low as 40 mg proving to be effective [700,701]. A
prospective, randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled,
partial crossover trial, compared the ability of oxytetracycline to
provide symptomatic relief of blepharitis, in 43 patients with and
without rosacea [702]. Only 25% of the patients with blepharitis
without rosacea responded to the antibiotic, whereas 50% respon￾ded when both diseases were present. A comparative prospective
interventional study consisting of 44 subjects showed that elevated
tear levels of MMP-8 on the ocular surface of individuals with ro￾sacea was found to be reduced significantly after 4- and 8-week
treatment with oral doxycycline [703]. A review suggested that
additional Level 1 studies are necessary to further assess the effi-
cacy of tetracyclines in the management of ocular rosacea [696].
Chronic blepharitis is typically characterized by inflammation of
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 597
the eyelids and there are many sub-types of this condition [381].
Tetracyclines are used to treat chronic blepharitis due to their
antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory effects and several studies
have described the beneficial effects of minocycline and doxycy￾cline [681,683,704]. However, to-date there are no randomized,
controlled, double-masked RCTs that demonstrate the efficacy of
antibiotics over lid hygiene or other treatments [705,706].
The effects of tetracyclines in patients with MGD have been
reported in a case report [707]. A randomized, unmasked pro￾spective controlled study compared different doxycycline doses in
150 patients who had chronic MGD and who did not respond to lid
hygiene and topical therapy for more than 2 months [708]. Subjects
were randomized into three groups: a high dose group (doxycy￾cline, 200 mg, twice a day), a low dose group (doxycycline, 20 mg,
twice a day) and a control group (placebo). After one month, both
the high- and low-dose doxycycline groups demonstrated statisti￾cally significant improvements in TBUT and symptoms.
A randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled cross-over
study was conducted to investigate the efficacy of low dose doxy￾cycline at 20 mg twice daily to treat clinical symptoms of Sjogren €
syndrome [709]. Only 5 of the 16 subjects on doxycycline reported
significant improvement in their symptoms. Another prospective,
randomized unmasked clinical trial consisting of 60 subjects with
moderate-to-severe MGD showed that minocycline at the daily
dose of 50 mg significantly improved clinical signs of MGD,
including TBUT, conjunctival and corneal staining, eyelid appear￾ance and meibum quality, than a control group treated with ocular
lubricants [710]. Ocular surface inflammatory mediators including
IL-6, IL-1b, IL-17a, TNF-a, and IL-12p70 were found to be signifi-
cantly reduced after two months of treatment [710].
4.4.1.1. Dosage and safety. The optimal dosing schedule of tetra￾cyclines for treating DED has not been established, with a variety of
dosing regimens having been proposed. These include 50 or 100 mg
doxycycline once a day [711], 200 mg twice daily for 1 month fol￾lowed by 200 mg daily, or an initial dose of 50 mg a day for the first
2 weeks followed by 100 mg a day for a period of 2.5 months, in an
intermittent fashion [681e683,707]. Others have proposed the use
of a low dose of doxycycline (20 mg) on a long-term basis [708].
In addition to the known side effects of tetracyclines, which
include gastrointestinal symptoms and photosensitivity, safety is￾sues associated with long-term antibiotic therapy have been raised.
To minimize risks, a recent study suggested that a three-month
course of 100 mg of minocycline might be sufficient to bring sig￾nificant meibomianitis under control, as continued control was
maintained for at least three months after cessation of therapy
[707]. Doxycycline (40 mg daily) is the only tetracycline approved
by the FDA for up to 16 weeks in the treatment of rosacea. Long￾term doxycycline treatment at this level does not exert antibiotic
selection pressure on the microbiota, preventing the development
of antibiotic resistance [712,713]. These recommendations may be
tempered by reports that, in women, the risk of developing breast
cancer and breast cancer morbidity increases cumulatively with
duration of antibiotic use, including tetracyclines [714,715],
although another study did not substantiate these findings [716].
Additional studies are needed to determine if there are risks with
long-term tetracycline use.
4.5. Macrolide therapy
Some reports exist concerning the positive impact of systemic
azithromycin in the treatment of MGD, especially in people
suffering from intolerance to other systemic antibiotics [717e720].
A recent laboratory-based study compared the effect of azi￾thromycin, doxycycline, minocycline or tetracycline for 5 days on
immortalized human meibomian gland epithelial cells [688]. Azi￾thromycin, but not the other antibiotics, significantly increased the
cellular accumulation of cholesterol, cholesterol esters, phospho￾lipids, and lysosomes. The authors concluded that the stimulatory
effects of azithromycin on human meibomian gland epithelial cell
function are unique and not duplicated by the other antibiotics
evaluated [688].
Azithromycin can be a valuable option when MGD occurs in
association with rosacea [721e723], and it is believed that its anti￾inflammatory properties may help control bacterial flora and lid
inflammation [706,724e726]. The most common side effects of oral
azithromycin are diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting.
The ideal dosage of systemic azithromycin is still controversial
and there is no universal agreement. Previous studies have shown
efficacy with a daily oral dose of 250 mg or 500 mg for the treat￾ment of rosacea [721,723,727]. A pulse treatment with oral azi￾thromycin for pustular acne has been proposed [728,729], and the
same concept appears to be successful for MGD management, using
500 mg per day for 3 days in 3 cycles with 7-day intervals [720].
Further double-masked RCTs must be performed to clarify long￾term efficacy and ideal dosing.
Table 12 summarizes several clinical studies investigating the
use of both oral and topical azithromycin in the management of
DED [720,730e735]. Where available, topical 1% azithromycin is
well tolerated and appears to be effective in the management of
MGD and evaporative DED, although the low number of well￾designed studies still makes this a somewhat controversial ther￾apy. In a recent large scale study by Hosseini and colleagues eval￾uating 907 subjects with blepharitis, a combination of topical
Table 12
Level 1, 2 and 3 studies of azithromycin for managing dry eye disease.
Author Subject group N Treatment variations Treatment
duration
(months)
Reported benefits
Luchs et al., 2008 [730] Blepharitis 21 Topical 1% 0.5 Improved symptoms and signs
Haque et al., 2010 [731] Severe
blepharitis
26 Topical 1% 1 Improved symptoms and signs
Igami et al., 2011 [720] Severe
blepharitis
13 Oral 500 mg/day for 3 days in 3
cycles with 7-day intervals
1.8 Improved symptoms and signs, tear function
Optiz et al., 2011 [732] Blepharitis 33 Topical 1% 1 Improved symptoms and signs
Nichols et al., 2012 [733] Contact lens
dry eye
50 Topical 1% 1 Improved symptoms and signs
Fadlallah et al., 2012 [734] Severe
blepharitis
67 Topical 1.5% 3 Improved symptoms and signs
Hosseini et al., 2016 [735] Blepharitis 907 Topical 0.1% dexamethasone; topical 1%
azithromycin; combination of both; vehicle
0.5 Improved symptoms and signs in the
combination and 0.1% dexamethasone groups
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 598
azithromycinedexamethasone used for 14 days twice daily was
safe and well tolerated [735]. This combination drop achieved
complete clinical resolution in a greater percentage of patients
(8.2%) than 1% azithromycin (5.2%), 0.1% dexamethasone (5.7%), or
vehicle (4.7%).
Whether there is benefit in combining systemic and topical
azithromycin to improve the treatment of evaporative DED, espe￾cially in the management of refractory or severe cases, requires
further study.
To date, two studies have compared the efficacy of doxycycline
and azithromycin for the management of MGD [717,736]. A five-day
oral azithromycin regimen was compared to one month of doxy￾cycline (200 mg) in one study (Level 2 evidence) [717]. Although
both treatments significantly improved clinical scores and symp￾toms, azithromycin appeared be more effective in improving clin￾ical signs. In the second Level 2 study, both topical 1% azithromycin
for four weeks and twice daily 100 mg oral doxycycline for two
months significantly decreased the clinical signs of MGD. Oral
doxycycline treatment was slightly less effective in improving
foreign body sensation and the signs of plugging and secretion than
topical azithromycin [736].
Of note, is a recent report that evaluated the role of oral anti￾biotics for meibomian gland-related OSD [737]. This review
concluded that there is no Level 1 evidence, and only scant evi￾dence overall, to support the use of oral antibiotics in the man￾agement of meibomian gland-related OSD.
5. Surgical approaches
5.1. Tarsorrhaphy
Tarsorrhaphy refers to a temporary or permanent surgical pro￾cedure in which the eyelids are partially or totally closed using
sutures. In addition to temporary closure with sutures, a temporary
tarsorrhaphy can also be achieved with adhesive tape, glue or le￾vator paralysis by botulinum toxin injection [738]. Any form of
tarsorrhaphy decreases ocular surface exposure, reduces evapora￾tion of the tear film and ultimately results in reduced ocular surface
desiccation and drying. The procedure is mainly performed in cases
of persistent epithelial defects and reserved for severe dry eye that
is refractory to medical treatments and punctal occlusion [499].
Possibly due to the fact that it is normally reserved as the last step
when all other treatments have failed, only 20% of patients reported
being unhappy with the aesthetic effects [739].
To-date, there are no studies comparing the efficacy of tarsor￾rhaphy to other treatment modalities in DED.
5.2. Surgical treatment for conjunctivochalasis
Conjunctivochalasis is characterized by loose, redundant, non￾edematous inferior bulbar conjunctiva that is located between the
globe and the eyelid. This is an age-related ocular disorder, which is
often overlooked and negatively impacts quality of life [740]. Con￾junctivochalasis is a common finding in dry eye, with a reported
prevalence of 54% in individuals with DED [741], and another report
suggesting that its presence has a positive predictive value of 93% in
the diagnosis of DED [742]. The severity of conjunctivochalasis can
be graded by recording the lid-parallel conjunctival folds (LIPCOF)
score, with a higher grading positively correlating with more severe
dry eye symptoms [743]. The mechanism linking con￾junctivochalasis with dry eye symptoms could relate to its impact on
the lower TMH [744,745]. Epiphora is also a symptom of con￾junctivochalasis, especially when it is located medially, and can be
alleviated by correction of conjunctivochalasis [746,747].
In severe cases of conjunctivochalasis that do not respond to
ocular lubricants, topical cyclosporine or punctal occlusion, resec￾tion of the excessive conjunctival tissue may be considered [748].
Several approaches to reduce the excessive conjunctival folds have
been reported, including electrocoagulation or thermal cauteriza￾tion [749,750], simple fixation to the sclera [751], and Argon laser
conjunctivoplasty [752]. In all studies (Level 3 evidence), some level
of improvement in symptoms has been reported in over 75% of
patients.
5.3. Essential blepharospasm treatment with botulinum neurotoxin
Essential blepharospasm (EB) is a focal cranial dystonia
involving the eyelid and forehead muscles. It has been reported that
40e60% of EB patients have dry eye symptoms and decreased
Schirmer scores [753e756]. Additionally, pro-inflammatory cyto￾kine levels in the tear fluid are also increased in dry eye patients
with EB, compared to those with only DED [757].
Botulinum toxin A injection for the management of EB causes a
temporary pharmacologic denervation of the orbicularis oculi
muscle. Several case-control studies (Level 2 evidence) report
amelioration of dry eye symptoms and an increase in TMH, TBUT
and tear clearance time after botulinum toxin A injection
[757e759]. However, these effects last for only 3 months [760]. In
contrast, tear production can possibly be impaired by botulinum
toxin A injections that occur too close to the lacrimal gland
[753,761,762].
5.4. Lid corrections
5.4.1. Dermatochalasis
Dermatochalasis is a term used to describe the presence of loose
and redundant eyelid skin and is a common sign of aging. Based on
Level 2 and 3 evidence, 46e51% of patients with dermatochalasis
have dry eye complaints and 55e86% of patients achieve subjective
improvement in symptoms after upper eyelid blepharoplasty
[763,764]. However, objective parameters have not been shown to
change significantly after blepharoplasty [764], and the reported
improvements may be purely psychological.
5.4.2. Blepharoptosis (ptosis)
Dry eye disease can be a risk factor for blepharoptosis, as it
causes increased friction between the upper lid and the ocular
surface, which may contribute to disinsertion or thinning of the
levator aponeurosis. A prospective case-control study (Level 2 ev￾idence) showed that a low Schirmer score occurs more often in
patients with acquired aponeurogenic ptosis than in controls [765].
Despite surgical correction of ptosis, tear quality can continue to
deteriorate. In an interventional case series, Schirmer scores and
TBUT revealed a decrease in tear quantity and quality after surgery
[766]. Tear volume may also decrease after ptosis surgery [767,768].
5.4.3. Lower lid blepharoplasty
Lower lid laxity and ectropion are common occurrences with
increasing age and are most commonly treated with trans￾cutaneous lower lid blepharoplasty. However, even after apparently
successful surgery, patients often complain of dryness, epiphora
and chemosis postoperatively [769e771].
Dry eye disease is one of the most common complications after
any kind of eyelid surgery [102], with the exception of tarsorrhaphy
[772]. Common causes of postoperative dry eye include chemosis,
increased exposure of the ocular surface, lagophthalmos, lower
eyelid malposition, or diminished blink reflex from surgical anes￾thesia or oedema [102,483]. These are described in more detail in
the TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic Dry Eye and Pathophysiology Reports.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 599
5.5. Conjunctival surgery and amniotic membrane grafts
Individuals with conjunctival disorders such as pterygium,
pingueculae, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and mucous membrane
pemphigoid often develop DED. Advanced pterygium results in an
uneven distribution and focal evaporation of tears over the ocular
surface, aggravating dry eye symptoms. Dry eye patients with se￾vere ocular surface inflammation and cicatrization could benefit
from surgical treatment with conjunctival reconstruction, as well as
removal of the inflamed tissues and activated fibroblasts
[773e775]. However, in patients with mucous membrane pem￾phigoid, any ocular surface and eyelid surgery should be performed
after the disease is adequately controlled by systemic immuno￾suppression to avoid exacerbation of the disease. Conjunctival or
limbal autograft reduces pterygium recurrence compared to bare
sclera excision and amniotic membrane transplantation, and has
become a standard treatment [776]. Concurrent application of
mitomycin C application further reduces the risk of recurrence,
however this is associated with potentially serious complications
such as scleral thinning, ulceration, and delayed conjunctival
epithelialization [777].
Severe DED can lead to persistent epithelial defects, corneal
ulceration and corneal scarring. Amniotic membrane grafts could
be considered for persistent epithelial defects in cases of ocular
cicatricial pemphigoid, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and other se￾vere OSD [499,775,778e782]. These membranes contain a wide
variety of neuropeptides and neurotransmitters, including acetyl￾choline and catecholamine [783e787].
A particular form of amniotic membrane transplant is the
PROKERA® and thinner PROKERA® SLIM (Bio-TissueDoral, FL, USA).
These devices contain human amniotic membrane processed with
a form of cryopreservation that retains the tissue's biological ac￾tivity. The membrane is contained within a thermoplastic ring that
permits the device to be inserted in a similar manner to a scleral
lens and holds the tissue firmly in place. The grafts typically
dissolve in approximately one week and the conformer ring can
then be removed [788]. To date, only a few case studies have been
published on its use [782,789,790]. One study did show sustained
symptom improvement for four months in dry eye subjects who
wore the PROKERA® SLIM for approximately five days on average
[782]. The authors also reported reduced corneal and conjunctival
staining and improved visual acuity.
5.6. Mechanical dacryoreservoirs
In severe DED, individuals with Schirmer scores of  1 mm may
require the application of lubricating drops every few minutes,
which seriously disrupts daytime activities and results in a marked
reduction in quality of life. In these cases, mechanical devices that
deliver lubricating drops from a reservoir through a catheter have
been used to continuously lubricate the ocular surface. A rabbit
study showed that a microinfusion pump, originally developed for
insulin treatment in diabetics, was able to deliver a dose of artificial
tears that was similar to that found in normal eyes [791]. In addi￾tion, eyes treated with corticosteroid delivered by this pump
recovered faster than those treated with topical corticosteroid.
In a prospective, non-randomized trial of 21 subjects with a
Schirmer score of  1 mm, a 60 ml reservoir was implanted under
the subcutaneous tissues of the anterior abdominal wall and con￾nected to a silicone catheter that ascended subcutaneously along
the chest, neck and temple to the upper conjunctival fornix
[792,793]. All subjects reported an improvement in symptoms and
exhibited prolonged TBUT with a reduction in corneal staining and
conjunctival hyperemia. Infections of the reservoir or the catheter,
although not reported in this study, can occur, and may require
explantation of the device.
While rare, it is clear that mechanical dacryoreservoirs may be a
valuable option in cases of very severe aqueous tear deficiency,
where all other less invasive measures have failed to achieve suf-
ficient subjective relief.
5.7. Major salivary gland transplantation
The aim of salivary gland transplantation is to provide some
functioning exocrine tissue to a severely dry eye. Possible in￾dications can include primary (congenital) alacrimia or severe
aqueous deficiency secondary to cicatricial conjunctivitis (due to
mucous membrane pemphigoid, Stevens-Johnson syndrome,
chemical burns), surgical damage or radioablation of lacrimal tissue
(such as that found in neoplastic disease of the head). Having a
functional salivary gland will, in addition to being a constant source
of lubrication, also provide epitheliotrophic factors that are also
present and functionally relevant in the tears [794].
The three major salivary glands, the parotid, submandibular and
sublingual gland, have all been used to lubricate the ocular surface,
although the approach of transplanting a sublingual gland to the
subconjunctival space has failed to succeed, due to ischemia of the
grafted tissue [795]. For the parotid gland and the submandibular
gland the surgical approaches are entirely different and both
require the expertise of an experienced oral surgeon.
5.7.1. Parotid duct transposition
In this procedure, the secretory duct of the parotid gland is
moved from its original premolar position in the mouth to the
lower conjunctival fornix [796]. Since the innervation of the gland
is maintained, a gustatory reflex epiphora of a purely serous
secretion results. Evidence for its success is limited to retrospective
case reports or series without quantitative follow-up data. Com￾plications include blepharitis and keratitis from excessive secretion,
for which measures such as systemic anticholinergics or para￾sympathetic denervation of the gland were found to be either
impracticable or ineffective and this technique seems to have been
abandoned [797].
5.7.2. Microvascular submandibular gland transplantation
A free partial or total submandibular gland with a vascular
pedicle and the secretory duct are transferred to the temple. A
microvascular anastomosis with facial vessels is created and the
duct sutured into the conjunctival fornix [798,799]. While the
procedure requires several hours of general anesthesia, it offers
some major advantages over other procedures using salivary gland
tissue, including (i) an established blood supply to ensure the
glands' viability, (ii) a secretion capable of replacing the mucous
and serous component of the tear film, (iii) absence of reflex sali￾vation due to intraoperative sympathetic denervation of the graft
and (iv) a maintained baseline secretion due to surviving para￾sympathetic intraglandular ganglion cells [800].
In rats and rabbits, transplanted submanidibular glands
remained viable and active for at least six months post trans￾plantation [801,802]. Several groups have published clinical results
in subjects with severe aqueous deficiency [798,799,803e807].
Despite the potential for microvascular complications, a reported
66e100% remained viable for at least five years, according to clin￾ical ophthalmological examination or scintigraphy [808]. Alloge￾neic grafts require long-term immunosuppression [809]. Most
reports come from maxillofacial or ear, nose and throat surgeons
and often have only limited data on specific ocular surface findings.
The most systematic evaluation to-date is a prospective, controlled
case series with a follow-up of more than 40 months [805,807]. The
results showed a substantial improvement in Schirmer score, TBUT,
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 600
use of tear substitutes and symptoms compared to controls (fellow
eyes without a viable submanidibular gland graft) from three
months through to the end of follow-up. Neither visual acuity
(probably due to pre-existing corneal scarring and other comor￾bidities) nor conjunctival inflammation or squamous metaplasia
improved [807].
When comparing total versus partial submanidibular glands
transplantation, Qin and coworkers reported severe epiphora in 19
out of 22 patients with a total submanidibular gland graft, versus 6
out of 20 eyes with a partial transplant [799]. Secretion from the
gland was stimulated by heat or physical activity and could be
blocked by anticholinergics [799,805,810,811]. Hypersecretion can
also be controlled surgically by reducing the size of the gland or by
partial ligation of the duct [805,812].
While the resulting lubrication contains many proteins and
other components abundant in tears, it is very hypo-osmolar
compared to tears and this hypo-osmolarity can induce micro￾cystic epithelial oedema in cases with oversecreting transplants
[190,794,807,813]. As a consequence, 100% of five corneal trans￾plants performed following submanidibular gland transplantation
failed, due to rejection, infection, calcification or epiphora￾associated epithelial oedema, with subsequent corneal perfora￾tion [807].
In summary, the submanidibular gland is the only major salivary
gland that is currently being used to supply lubrication to the eye by
means of transplantation. It is only indicated in patients with ab￾solute aqueous tear deficiency with persistent severe discomfort
and when all other means have failed. These patients benefit from
substantial relief of severe symptoms and some signs of dry eye, but
the procedure does not enable successful visual rehabilitation.
5.8. Minor salivary gland autotransplantation
Oral and nasal mucosa can be used to reconstruct the fornices
and to provide mucin to the ocular surface, but this procedure fails
to provide sufficient lubrication to sustain a healthy corneal graft
[814,815]. Labial mucosa (which lines the lips) has been used as a
complex graft to the conjunctival fornix in severe dry eyes, with
excellent success in terms of graft viability [795,797]. The secretion
of the minor salivary glands is predominantly mucinous, with the
buccal salivary glands showing the highest flow rate [816]. Trans￾plantation resulted in an increase in Schirmer test score and TBUT
and also provided symptomatic relief [817].
Marinho reported results of 14 and Sant’ Anna, of 19 patients
with severe DED secondary to Stevens-Johnson syndrome who had
labial salivary gland transplantation [817,818]. Up to 14 months
postoperatively, tear volume was improved in over 70% of patients.
Corneal transparency and visual acuity improved in 72% and
symptoms decreased in 54% and 100% respectively. Potential
complications include temporal labial hypoesthesia or graft ne￾crosis, the feeling of “watery” eyes or bulkiness and laxity of the
eyelids leading to entropion, as well as donor site morbidity.
6. Dietary modifications
There is growing evidence that diet and nutritional supple￾mentation play a role in DED. The contributions of general hydra￾tion status, and other interventions, such as lactoferrin and anti￾oxidant supplementation, are also worthy of consideration.
6.1. General hydration state
Whole-body hydration status has been proposed to have a po￾tential role in DED control. Tear osmolarity levels in healthy adults
increase as a result of modest whole-body dehydration (2e3% body
mass loss) during exercise [819,820], an effect that is modifiable
with fluid intake [819]. Observational data suggest that whole-body
hydration status may also directly influence the clinical expression
of DED. In a cross-sectional study of 111 participants aged at least 60
years, individuals classified as having DED were found to have
higher plasma osmolality, indicating sub-optimal hydration, than
individuals without DED [821]. Whether improving whole body
hydration with fluid intervention confers a therapeutic benefit in
people with DED requires further study. Specifically, there remains
the need for controlled intervention trials to assess the efficacy and
safety of optimizing hydration status as a non-drug therapy for
DED.
6.2. Essential fatty acids
Essential fatty acids (EFAs) are termed ‘essential’ as they are
necessary for healthy metabolic processes to occur [822]. Humans
are unable to form EFAs in vivo and must ingest them from dietary
sources. Two key EFAs are the 18-carbon omega-3 (u-3) and
omega-6 (u-6) fatty acids. The u-3 EFAs exist as both short (alpha￾linolenic acid, ALA) and long-chain (eicosapentaenoic acid, EPA and
docosahexaenoic acid, DHA) sub-types. Both subtypes can be
consumed from food, with long-chain forms also capable of being
produced from short-chain forms within the body, through the
desaturation/elongation of short-chain EFAs. Common food sources
for ALA include flaxseeds, walnuts, chia seeds and soybean oil. The
long-chain u-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), EPA and DHA,
are present in high concentrations in oily fish (such as tuna, salmon,
trout, sardines and mackerel) and to a lesser extent in shellfish
(such as prawns, oysters and mussels). The u-6 EFAs are commonly
derived from vegetable oils, such as safflower oil and corn oil, in the
form of linolenic acid (LA), which, once ingested, is desaturated and
elongated to gamma-linoleic acid (GLA) and arachidonic acid (AA)
[823].
Within the body, u-3 and u-6 EFAs compete for the enzymes
that regulate their metabolism, to produce eicosanoids that
modulate systemic inflammation. Eicosanoids derived from the u-
6, AA-dependent pathway, including prostaglandin-E2 (PGE2),
thromboxane-A2 and leukotriene-B4, are pro-inflammatory. While
most u-6 eicosanoids promote inflammation [824], metabolism of
GLA can result in the production of prostaglandin-E1 (PGE1) and
thromboxane-A1, which are anti-inflammatory mediators [824].
The potential effect(s) of u-6 EFAs on inflammation is therefore
complex. Long-chain u-3 EFAs bias prostaglandin metabolism to￾wards the production of anti-inflammatory eicosanoids, including
resolvins and protectins, which are essential for limiting and
resolving inflammation [825]. As such, the relative ratio of
consumed u-3 to u-6 EFAs influences the overall inflammatory
status of the body [824].
In modern times, the balance of u-3 to u-6 essential fatty acids
(EFA) dietary intake has shifted, thereby altering the balance of
inflammatory cytokines [826]. In current Western diets, the ratio of
u-6:u-3 intake is typically 15:1, whereas an ideal ratio is generally
considered to be 4:1 [827]. As a result, there has been scientific
interest in understanding whether increasing systemic u-3 EFA
levels through nutritional intervention, to lower the u-6:u-3 ratio,
can yield systemic anti-inflammatory effects that are beneficial for
conditions with an inflammatory overlay, including DED.
6.2.1. Basic science studies
Omega-3 EFAs are recognized to have a broad range of systemic
anti-inflammatory effects, including inhibiting the production of
several key pro-inflammatory cytokines (such as IL-1, IL-2 and TNF￾a) [828e830] and preventing T-lymphocyte proliferation [831,832],
processes that have been implicated in the pathogenesis of DED.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 601
Several laboratory studies have shown that fatty acid enrich￾ment can impart lacrimal gland changes and alter the ocular sur￾face response to pharmacologic-induced models of DED [833e838].
Two recent laboratory-based studies have evaluated the impact of
EFAs on the function of human meibomian gland epithelial cells
[833,834]. The study by Liu et al. showed that EFAs influence the
quality and quantity of intracellular lipids, resulting in a 2.4- to 3.7-
fold increase in the cellular content of triglycerides after u-3 and u-
6 treatment, respectively. In rats, dietary supplementation with u-3
(EPA þ DHA) for three months was associated with their incorpo￾ration into lacrimal gland tissues [835]. Two-month dietary
enrichment with combined u-3 (EPA þ DHA) and u-6 (GLA) PUFAs,
reduced corneal keratitis, minimized the overexpression of
conjunctival major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II and
inhibited upregulation of prostaglandin (PG) E1 and PGE2 in the
lacrimal gland, after 28 days of scopolamine intervention [836]. In
murine DED models, topical formulations of u-3 EFAs have been
shown to reduce levels of corneal fluorescein staining [837,838],
and decrease both CD11b (þ) cell numbers and conjunctival
expression of IL-1a and TNF-a [837]. Topical u-3 EFAs, with and
without added 0.1% HA, have also been found to improve corneal
irregularity and reduce epithelial barrier disruption [838].
Experimental evidence supports the therapeutic potential of a
class of endogenous lipid-derived immunomodulators, resolvins,
derived from EPA (resolvin E1) and DHA (resolvin D1), as an anti￾inflammatory treatment for DED [14,839,840]. Resolvins E1 and
D1 promote the resolution of inflammation in cultured conjunctival
goblet cells by reducing cysteinyl leukotrienes [839,840]. In murine
DED models, resolvin E1 has been reported to increase tear pro￾duction, improve corneal regularity and decrease macrophage
infiltration [841], and to reduce corneal epithelial barrier disruption
and attenuate conjunctival goblet cell loss [842]. Topical application
of a prodrug of resolvin E1, RX-10045 (0.1%), which is rapidly hy￾drolyzed to its active form in biological matrices, can reduce
corneal stromal haze after rabbit corneal injury [843]. In a recent
clinical study RX-10045 failed to meet a primary endpoint related
to corneal staining [329]. While investigations involving resolvin
D1 are less prevalent, it should be noted that these agents have a
role in corneal health. For example, a derivative of DHA, NPD1, is
important in nerve regeneration and corneal sensitivity [844,845].
6.2.2. Human observational data
The Women's Health Study, involving over 32,000 women,
described an association between a low dietary intake of u-3 EFAs
and DED in women [846]. This study reported a 30% reduction in
the risk of DED with each additional gram of u-3 EFAs consumed
per day. A higher ratio of dietary u-6:u-3s was also associated with
an elevated risk of DED (for  15:1 versus <4:1, odds ratio: 2.51; 95%
CI: 1.13, 5.58, p ¼ 0.01). Furthermore, it has been recently shown
that the ratio of u-6:u-3 tear lipids is elevated in people with DED
and that this occurs in proportion to the degree of tear film
dysfunction and corneal staining [847]. The level of dietary u-3 EFA
intake is also associated with differences in the polar lipid pattern
of meibomian gland secretions in women with Sjogren syndrome €
[848].
6.2.3. Clinical trials of EFA supplements
Clinical trials have been undertaken to assess the potential
benefit of oral u-3 and u-6 EFA supplementation, both alone and in
combination, for treating DED. Most of these intervention trials
have been performed at single sites and with relatively small
participant numbers (sample size <70). The clinical trials have had
varying degrees of masking, of both participants and outcome as￾sessors, with few being double-masked.
All of the clinical trials evaluating u-3 EFAs alone (Table 13)
[849e859] have been undertaken for three months or less, with the
exception of one pilot study that investigated the efficacy of short￾chain u-3 EFAs (ALA) for treating MGD and blepharitis over 12
months [849]. The u-3 EFA interventions have varied both in terms
of subtype (short- and/or long-chain formulations) and dose. To
date, only one study has evaluated the relative efficacy of different
forms of long-chain u-3 EFAs for treating DED, comparing krill oil, in
primarily phospholipid form, to fish oil, in triacylglyceride form
[858]. This randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial suggested
that u-3 EFAs in phospholipid form (krill oil) might confer addi￾tional therapeutic benefit in DED, with further clinical in￾vestigations needed to assess this potential. A variety of outcome
measures have been examined, primarily involving quantifying
changes to patient symptomatology and objective clinical measures
relating to tear stability and/or production. More recently, beneficial
effects with oral u-3 EFA supplements in DED have also been
demonstrated, with the specification of tear osmolarity as a primary
outcome measure [858,859]. A recent pilot study has further
demonstrated central corneal neuroprotective effects with a three￾month supplementation of a moderate dose of u-3s (1000 mg/day
EPA þ 500 mg/day DHA) in DED [860]. Attempting to summarize the
best available evidence, a meta-analysis concluded that u-3 EFA
supplementation improves TBUT and Schirmer scores in individuals
with DED, without significantly altering OSDI scores [861].
Although many patients self-medicate with u-3 EFA supple￾ments on the premise of their well-publicized health benefits, use
of these supplements requires some precautions. There are several
important systemic contra-indications, including liver disease,
atrial fibrillation and bleeding disorders; in these cases, medical
advice should be sought prior to commencing supplementation.
There may be potential risks to health with high-dose u-3 EFA
intake (>2000 mg/day combined EPA þ DHA), in terms of a
heightened risk of bleeding [862], and people with hematological
disorders should seek medical advice before consuming u-3 EFA
supplements [863]. The possibility that males with high serum
concentrations of long-chain u-3 PUFAs have a heightened risk of
prostate cancer has also been raised [864], but remains contentious
[865,866]. Both the FDA and the National Health and Medical
Research Council (NHMRC) in Australia recommend an upper daily
limit for omega-3 fatty acid consumption of 3 g (3000 mg); this
includes omega-3 fatty acids derived both from food and supple￾ments. It is important to note that this dosage relates to the amount
of omega-3 fatty acid content, rather than the size of the supple￾ment capsule per se. For example, many 1 g (1000 mg) fish oil
capsules contain 180 mg EPA þ 120 mg DHA; thus only about 30% of
the content of the fish oil supplement capsule will be long-chain
omega-3 fatty acids.
Interventional clinical trials that have evaluated u-6 EFA for￾mulations for treating DED have been performed at single-sites,
ranging in duration from three weeks to six months, and with
considerable variations in daily dose (Table 14) [867e871]. Most
studies targeted study populations with Sjogren syndrome, with €
variable outcomes reported in relation to changes in dry eye
symptoms, ocular inflammatory markers and other clinical signs
(such as ocular surface staining, TBUT, Schirmer score).
Clinical trials that investigated supplementation with combined
u-3 and u-6 EFAs have ranged in duration from three to six months
and include both single-site and multi-center studies (Table 15)
[872e877]. A 2014 meta-analysis that considered the overall effi-
cacy of PUFA supplementation for treating DED concluded that,
compared with placebo, these interventions resulted in a signifi-
cant reduction in both symptom score (quantified using the OSDI)
and in the rate of cells positive for HLA-DR [878]. A Cochrane sys￾tematic review protocol on this topic was also published in 2014
and is currently in progress [879].
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 602
6.2.4. Summary of essential fatty acids
The role of u-3 and/or u-6 EFA supplementation for treating
DED is not yet completely understood. Although a sizeable number
of clinical trials have been conducted (Tables 13e15), most have
been of short duration and show contrasting findings. There are few
high-quality, randomized controlled clinical trials to inform prac￾tice. As a result, there is currently a lack of consensus in relation to
the optimal protocol, in particular to the dose, composition or
duration of treatment. Furthermore, most clinical studies have not
measured compliance to the study interventions with blood serum
fatty acid assays. This is considered essential to precisely assess the
health effects of supplementation, particularly as common sources
of u-3 EFAs (such as fish oil supplements) have potential gastro￾intestinal side effects that include fishy after-taste and diarrhoea,
which can negatively impact compliance [880]. A large-scale,
multi-center, randomized, placebo-controlled trial (DREAM study)
assessing the efficacy and safety of u-3 PUFAs (dosed at 2000 mg
EPA þ 1000 mg DHA/day) over 24 months, funded by the National
Institute of Health, is currently underway (https://clinicaltrials.gov/
ct2/show/NCT02128763). This study is predicted to inform treat￾ment recommendations for using high-dose u-3 PUFAs for treating
DED.
6.3. Lactoferrin
Lactoferrin is a multifunctional tear glycoprotein with anti￾bacterial, anti-inflammatory and anti-angiogenic properties. Tear
lactoferrin levels are considered an indicator of lacrimal secretory
function [881]. Reduced tear lactoferrin levels have been reported
in a number of clinical populations with DED [881e886], providing
scientific rationale to evaluate the potential benefit of dietary
supplementation with lactoferrin as a dry eye intervention. Oral
lactoferrin preserves lacrimal gland function in aged mice by
reducing oxidative damage and suppressing gland inflammation
[887]. In a pilot study of seven individuals with Sjogren syndrome, €
oral lactoferrin supplementation (270 mg/day) for one month,
improved dry eye symptoms, TBUT, ocular surface vital staining
scores, corneal sensitivity and impression cytology scores, with
Table 13
Major published intervention clinical trials of oral u-3 EFA supplementation for dry eye disease.
Author, Year N Study
period
Oral u-3 intervention
(daily dose)
Control Evidence
level
Parameters with significant
improvements relative to controlg
Parameters without significant
effect relative to controlg
Macsai, 2008 [849]. 38f 12 months Flaxseed oil 3300 mg Placebo
(olive oil)
1 Primary: Symptoms (OSDI) Secondary: TBUT, meibum
scores, Schirmer score, corneal
staining.
Wojtowicz et al., 2011
[850]
36 90 days EPA 450 mg þ DHA
300 mg þ flaxseed oil
100 mg
Placebo
(wheatgerm
oil)
1e Symptoms (OSDI) Schirmer score, evaporimetry,
lipid composition of MG
secretions, TBUT
Bhargava et al., 2013 [851] 518 3 months EPA 650 mg þ DHA
350 mg
Placebo
(corn oil)
1 Symptoms, TBUT and Schirmer score Rose bengal staining and
conjunctival impression
cytology
Olenik et al., 2013 [852] 61b 3 months EPA 127.5 mg þ DHA
1050 mgc
Placeboc
(sunflower
oil)
1 Symptoms (OSDI), TBUT, lid margin
inflammation, MG expression and
Schirmer score
None
Kawakita et al., 2013 [853] 27 12 weeks EPA 1245 mg þ DHA
540 mg
Placebo
(middle
chain
triglycerides)
1 Symptoms and TBUT Schirmer score, ocular surface
fluorescein or rose bengal
staining
Kangari et al., 2013 [854] 64 30 days EPA 360 mg þ DHA
240 mg
Placebo
(middle
chain
triglycerides)
1 Primary: TBUT
Secondary: Symptoms (OSDI) and
Schirmer score
None
Pinazo-Duran et al., 2013
[855]
66d 3 months EPA 85 mg þ DHA
700 mg þ 60 mg
DPA þ antioxidant
None (open￾label)
2 Not applicable Reduced inflammatory tear
cytokines (relative to baseline
only)
Olenik, 2014 [856] 905 12 weeks EPA 127.5 mg þ DHA
1050 mg þ DPA 90 mg
None (open￾label)
2 Not applicable Symptomsa (relative to
baseline only)
Bhargava, 2015 [857] 256 45 days EPA 720 mg þ DHA
480 mg
Placebo
(olive oil)
1 Primary: Symptoms.
Secondary: TBUT and conjunctival
cytology
Secondary: Schirmer score
Deinema et al., 2017 [858] 60 90 days Krill oil (EPA
945 mg þ DHA
510 mg) and Fish oil
(EPA 1000 mg þ DHA
500 mg)
Placebo
(olive oil)
1 Primary: Tear osmolarity and
symptoms (OSDI). Secondary: TBUT,
Ocular bulbar redness, tear levels of the
pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-17A.
Secondary: NIBUT, Schirmer
score, TMH, levels of other tear
cytokines IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10,
IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha.
Epitropoulos et al., 2016
[859]
105 12 weeks EPA 1680 mg þ DHA
560 mg re-esterified
u-3 EFAs
Safflower oil
(3136 mg)
1 Primary: Tear osmolarity. Secondary:
TBUT, Symptoms (OSDI), MMP-9
positivity.
Secondary: Corneal fluorescein
staining, Schrimer test.
DHA - docosahexaenoic acid; DPA - docosapentaenoic acid; EPA - eicosapentaenoic acid; IFN e interferon; IL e interleukin; MG - meibomian gland; MMP-9 e matrix
metalloproteinase-9; N - number of subjects; NIBUT e non-invasive tear break up time; OSDI - ocular surface disease index; TBUT - tear break up time; TMH, tear meniscus
height; TNF e tumor necrosis factor. a No objective clinical measurements were evaluated. b Study population involved only individuals with MGD.
c Both the intervention and control groups were instructed to also undertake eyelid hygiene and use non-preserved artificial tears, each day, throughout the study. d Study population involved both individuals with DED (n ¼ 30) and healthy controls (n ¼ 36). e Double-masked, randomized controlled pilot study, which was inadequately powered to detect significant differences between the study groups. f Study population involved individuals with MGD and blepharitis. g Primary and secondary outcomes are specified when defined by the authors.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 603
reversal of improvement upon treatment cessation [888]. A recent
single-center, prospective, randomized, controlled clinical trial re￾ported improvement in dry eye symptoms, TBUT and Schirmer
scores, relative to placebo, with daily oral lactoferrin post￾operatively for two months (350 mg/day) following small incision
cataract surgery [889]. Further research is necessary to clarify the
role of lactoferrin supplementation for treating DED.
6.4. Other dietary considerations
Oxidative stress, which generates cell-damaging reactive ox￾ygen species, may be involved in the cellular injury that leads to
OSD, including dry eye [890]. In a crossover, placebo-controlled,
randomized trial involving an orally-administered antioxidant
supplement (containing beta-carotene, vitamins E, C, B, B6, D,
Table 14
Major published interventional clinical trials of oral u-6 EFA supplementation for dry eye disease.
Author, Year N Study
period
Oral u-6 intervention
(daily dose)
Control Evidence
level
Parameters with significant improvements
relative to controlf
Parameters without significant effect
relative to controlf
Manthorpe
et al., 1984
[867]
36c 3 weeks cis-linoleic acid
365 mg þ GLA 45 mg
Placebo 1 Schirmer test score TBUT, lissamine green staining, tear
lysozyme and corneal sensitivity
Oxholm et al.,
1986 [868]
28c 8 weeks cis-linoleic acid
2190 mg þ GLA
270 mg
Placebo 1 None No improvements in Schirmer score,
TBUT or lissamine green staining
Theander et al.,
2002 [869]
90c 6 months Two doses tested:
(1) GLA 800 mg; (2)
GLA 1600 mg
Placebo
(corn oil)
1 None. No improvements with either dose for
eye pain, dry eye symptoms, Schirmer
test or lissamine green staining
Barabino et al.,
2003 [872]
26d 45 days LA 57 mg þ GLA
30 mge
Placeboe 1 Symptoms, reduced conjunctival HLA-DR
expression and lissamine green staining.
TBUT, Schirmer test score
Aragona et al.,
2005 [870]
40c 1 month LA 112 mg þ GLA
15 mg
Placebo
(fructose)
1 Symptoms, increased levels of tear PGE1
and CFS
TBUT, tear basal secretion
Pinna et al.,
2007 [871]
57a 6 months LA 28.5 mg þ GLA
15 mg
None 2b Not applicable Symptoms, MG secretion turbidity and
MG obstruction (relative to baseline
only)
CFS e corneal fluorescein staining; GLA - gamma-linolenic acid; HLA-DR - human leukocyte antigen D-related; LA - linolenic acid; N - number of subjects; PGE1-prostaglandin
E1; TBUT - tear break up time.
a Study population involved only individuals with MGD. b Investigator-masked only.
c Study population involved only individuals with primary Sjogren syndrome. €
d Study population involved only individuals with aqueous-deficient DED. e Both the intervention and control groups were instructed to use non-preserved artificial tears, each day, throughout the study. f Primary and secondary outcomes are specified when defined by the authors.
Table 15
Major published intervention clinical trials of combined oral u-3 and u-6 EFA supplementation for dry eye disease.
Author, Year N Study
period
Oral u-6 intervention (daily
dose)
Control Evidence
level
Parameters with significant
improvements relative to
controla
Parameters without
significant effect relative to
controla
Creuzot et al.,
2006 [873]
71 6 months EPA 28 mg þ DHA
392 mg þ GLA 82 mg þ LA
126 mg
Placebo (basic oleic acid) 1b Reflex tearing and bulbar
hyperemia
Schirmer score, TBUT, ocular
surface fluorescein and
lissamine green staining
Larmo et al.,
2010 [874]
86c 3 months Sea buckthorn oil (2 g): long
chain u-3 EFAs 149 mg þ u-6
245 mg
Placebo (medium-chain
triglycerides)
1 Bulbar redness and ocular
burning
Tear osmolarity, Schirmer
score, TBUT
Brignole￾Baudouin
et al., 2011
[875]
106 3 months EPA 427.5 mg þ DHA
285 mg þ borage oil
15 mg þ zinc
10 mg þ vitamins
Placebo (medium-chain
triglycerides)
1 Reduction in percentage of
conjunctival HLA-DR positive
cells.
Schirmer score, TBUT and
ocular surface staining
Jackson et al.,
2011 [876]
43 6 months ALA 1000 mg þ GLA 500 mg ALA 1000 mg þ GLA
500 mg þ topical
cyclosporine 2 daily for
the last 3 months
2d Not applicable Both groups showed
improvements in symptoms
and TBUT relative to baseline
only
Creuzot￾Garcher
et al., 2011
[877]
181 6 months EPA 28 mg þ DHA
392 mg þ GLA 82 mg þ LA
126 mg
Placebo (basic oleic acid) 1 TBUT, reduced ocular fatigue
score
Schirmer score, ocular
surface staining.
Sheppard et al.,
2013 [878]
38e 6 months ALA 196 mg þ EPA
128 mg þ DHA 99 mg þ DPA
39 mg þ LA 710 mg þ GLA
240 mg
Placebo (sunflower oil) 1 Symptoms (OSDI), corneal
surface asymmetry index and
conjunctival HLA-DR
expression
TBUT, conjunctival
fluorescein and lissamine
green staining, Schirmer
score.
ALA - alpha-linolenic acid; DHA - docosahexaenoic acid; DPA - docosapentaenoic acid; EFAs e essential fatty acids; EPA - eicosapentaenoic acid; GLA - gamma-linolenic acid;
HLA-DR - human leukocyte antigen D-related; LA - linolenic acid; OSDI e ocular surface disease index; N - number of subjects; TBUT - tear break up time. a Primary and secondary outcomes are specified when defined by the authors. b Masking procedures are unclear.
c Both intervention and control groups included contact lens wearers. d Neither clinical outcome assessors or participants were masked (open-label study). e Study population involved only post-menopausal women.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 604
zinc and copper) in individuals with marginal DED, relative im￾provements in tear stability, goblet cell density and squamous
metaplasia were demonstrated at the one-month study endpoint
[891]. Another small randomized, controlled clinical trial of a
combination antioxidant and mineral (zinc) oral supplement re￾ported improvements in TBUT and Schirmer scores, as well as
reduced ocular symptoms in people with DED, compared with
placebo over 12 weeks [892]. An open-label, non-controlled pilot
trial involving 13 subjects with DED showed that daily oral
antioxidant supplementation, with Aristotelia chilensis berry
extract (30 mg), resulted in relative improvements in dry eye
symptoms and Schirmer scores, compared with baseline, over
two months [893].
Alpha-lipoic acid, a naturally occurring disulfide compound, also
has anti-oxidant capacity [894]. In an animal model of post￾menopausal dry eye, dietary supplementation with alpha-lipoic
acid for 16 weeks was found to increase the activity of lacrimal
peroxidase and improve lacrimal production [895]. Whether alpha￾lipoic has clinical application in DED in humans remains to be
investigated.
Kawashima and colleagues showed that calorie restriction pre￾serves lacrimal gland function by attenuating oxidative damage in
the lacrimal gland, suggesting that dietary changes and a reduction
in calorific intake may prove beneficial in the management of dry
eye [896]. More recent work from the same group in both a rat dry
eye model and human clinical trial has shown the short-term value
of dietary changes on dry eye signs and symptoms [897]. A recent
cross-sectional single-visit study also supported the notion that
increased body fat may result in an increase in dry eye symptoms
[898]. Alcohol intake induces transient dry eye in healthy in￾dividuals [899], suggesting that its consumption may aggravate
symptoms and signs of dry eye.
Recently, the use of spectacles containing extracts of four me￾dicinal plants with reported antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
properties, three times daily for eight weeks, was described to
improve both subjective and objective signs of dry eye, compared
with a placebo intervention, in individuals with mild DED [900].
Findings from these preliminary investigations require confirma￾tion in sufficiently large, appropriately controlled, multi-center
clinical trials.
7. Local environmental considerations
Several “environmental” factors have been implicated in DED,
including systemic and topical medications, desiccating conditions,
digital device use and contact lens wear [102]. Consideration of
these risk factors is important because this information can provide
additional information on a patient's individual response to pre￾scribed therapy.
Modification to any relevant environmental issues are poten￾tially useful early management options, as any initial ocular surface
changes culminating in DED may be prevented or potentially
reversed by removing the associated environmental risk factors.
7.1. Chronic topical medications
A number of studies have shown that preservatives may be
associated with allergic, toxic or inflammatory reactions, particu￾larly in patients using topical medications on a long-term basis.
Preservatives such as BAK irritate the ocular surface [98], and both
symptoms (such as burning, dryness and foreign body sensation)
and signs are significantly more frequent in patients using pre￾served glaucoma medications [901,902]. Several studies have sug￾gested that glaucoma medications may contribute to OSD and the
development of dry eye [903,904], and the severity of OSD has been
correlated with the number of preserved medications in use and
with glaucoma disease severity [905e907].
Two large multicenter European clinical trials showed that
changing to preservative-free (PF) glaucoma medications resulted
in patients experiencing significantly fewer signs and symptoms of
OSD [901,902]. The PF medications available for glaucoma therapy
include prostaglandin analogues (PGAs), tafluprost PF, beta￾blockers, timolol maleate PF and a fixed dose combination in the
form of dorzolamide/timolol PF. Preservative-free timolol has been
available for several years in the USA and Europe and has fewer
negative effects on OSD symptoms, signs and tear function tests
[908]. Ciancaglini et al. undertook confocal microscopy of the
conjunctiva and performed impression cytology to demonstrate
that the use of unpreserved levobunolol was associated with fewer
conjunctival changes [909]. Renieri et al. reported a crossover
clinical trial of 2298 subjects switching from various BAK-preserved
therapies to preservative-free dorzolamide/timolol and found
improved local tolerability in 80% of the patients [910]. Uusitalo
et al. switched 158 patients from BAK-preserved latanoprost to
preservative-free tafluprost for 3 months [911]. They found signif￾icant decreases in symptoms, corneal fluorescein staining,
conjunctival hyperemia, abnormal conjunctival cells (based on
HLA-DR and MUC5AC) and improvements in TBUT and Schirmer
scores.
In addition to the availability of PF drugs, alternative pre￾servatives have been developed to minimize the toxic effect of BAK
[912]. Polyquaternium-1 (Polyquad®) is a quaternary ammonium
preservative considered less toxic to the ocular surface, based on
studies examining toxicity to corneal and conjunctival epithelial
cells. Labbe et al. [913] showed that Polyquad induced considerably
less toxicity than BAK in vivo and produced similar results to the
control for the Schirmer test, slit-lamp, corneal fluorescein staining
and histology [913]. SofZia™ is an oxidative preservation system
used in one preparation of travoprost and several studies have
shown improvement in symptoms and signs of OSD after switching
from BAK-preserved medications to sofZia-preserved drops
[914e916].
Further information on preservative interactions with the ocular
surface can be found in the TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic Dry Eye Report
[102].
7.2. Systemic medications
Many drugs used for treating chronic illnesses can contribute to
DED. A higher incidence of dry eye has been reported in individuals
using antihistamines, beta-blockers, antidepressants, diuretics,
anxiolytics, antipsychotics, anti-Parkinsonian drugs, isotretinoin,
estrogen therapy and systemic chemotherapy [102,917]. The stra￾tegies to reduce or eliminate systemic drug-induced side effects
include changing the route of administration from oral to topical,
discontinuation of the drugs, dose adjustments, switching to
another medication or more aggressive management of the
induced dry eye [102].
7.3. Decreased blink rate
Blinking is critical to maintain preocular tear film homeostasis
on the ocular surface [918]. Decreased blink rate or incomplete
blinking affect tear dynamics, lengthening the period during which
the ocular surface is exposed to water loss before the next blink,
thus contributing to the development of DED [919,920]. A major
factor that impacts blink rate is the use of video display terminals
(VDTs) and other digital devices, reading and a variety of other
visual tasks and cognitive functions. With the exponential increase
of computer use in the workplace, a proportionate increase in the
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 605
number of reports on the epidemiology and pathology of this
condition has been reported [921,922]. The percentage of office
workers using VDTs and diagnosed with dry eye increased up to
10% in male and 20% in female Japanese office workers [923]. The
main mechanisms by which VDTs may induce dry eye signs or
symptoms include increased tear film evaporation rate, develop￾ment of MGD at an earlier age, reduced tear volume [924,925],
decreased MUC5AC concentration in the tears [926] and increase
oxidative stress [927].
The main treatment for individuals exhibiting such ocular sur￾face changes is prevention of desiccation, and frequent use of ocular
lubricants without preservatives is often the initial treatment of
choice. However, devices or computer software that stimulate
blinking on a more frequent basis represent a potential mechanism
for minimizing the effect of VDTs. Miura et al. showed that a novel
light-emitting diode (LED) device increased blink frequency for
both dry eye and control groups [928]. Cardona et al. presented a
strategy in which reflex blinking was elicited by a sudden distortion
of the screen text to increase the spontaneous blink rate [929].
Frequent breaks and blinking awareness training are recommended
for VDT users requiring prolonged periods of visual demand. Er￾gonomic factors such as lowering the screen allows the digital
device user to gaze downward, thus exposing less ocular surface
area to ambient air, reducing tear film loss and reducing symptoms
of dry eye [930].
7.4. Desiccating conditions and environmental pollutants
The ocular surface is the most environmentally exposed
mucosal surface of the body, encountering challenges such as wind
exposure, low relative humidity, temperature extremes, UV radia￾tion, irritants, pollutants and tobacco smoke. Exposure to adverse
ambient conditions such as low humidity and/or increased/
decreased air temperature and/or air movement, leads to increased
tear instability and evaporation [931]. These conditions promote
the development of dry eye symptoms in normal individuals and
also worsen symptoms and signs in those with DED [932e935].
Chronic dryness of the ocular surface results in a downstream
cascade of events that promote inflammation, epithelial apoptosis,
loss of goblet cells and changes in the meibomian glands. Studies
have demonstrated the efficacy of certain treatments in response to
unfavorable environmental conditions. These include the use of
artificial tears [43,936,937], medications that suppress inflamma￾tory responses [584,842,938e940], drugs that induce mucus
secretion [941], and drugs that decrease apoptosis [942].
While avoiding exposure to adverse conditions that can increase
tear instability and evaporation is the initial tactic, creating con￾ditions that mimic an adequate environment for the ocular surface
is also a valid approach. These include the use of humidifiers
[317,943] and retention of tear fluid using moisture chamber
spectacles, contact lenses and punctal plugs [307,944e946].
Increased air pollution is associated with dry eye [947] and
factors such as cigarette smoking may result in a dysfunctional tear
film [948e950]. Tobacco smoke contains many oxidizing and toxic
substances, exposing inhalers to an enormous free radical load.
Matsumoto et al. confirmed the deleterious effect of chronic cu￾mulative tobacco smoke exposure on the tear film, resulting in an
increase in tear hexanoyl-lysine levels, an oxidative stress marker
for lipid peroxidation [951]. Similar findings were observed by
Rummenie et al. following passive cigarette smoke exposure [952].
The adverse effects of passive tobacco smoke on the tear film is
evidenced by an increase in tear inflammatory cytokines, lipid
peroxidation products and a decrease in mucosal defense, resulting
in instability and damage to the ocular surface epithelia [948,951].
Inhibition of the oxidative stress therapeutically might act to “break
the cycle” of cytotoxicity, inflammation and cell death.
7.5. Contact lens wear
There are many factors that contribute to contact lens related
discomfort and DED, including issues relating to the contact lens
(including lens material, design, fit, replacement period and lens
care system) [953], and the ocular surface [954]. A previous TFOS
report addressed strategies to reduce contact lens discomfort [500].
These strategies included adjusting the contact lens replacement
frequency, eliminating or changing the care system, altering lens
design, adding tear supplementation and punctal occlusion [500].
In conclusion, there are many environmental factors that clini￾cians need to consider when treating individuals with DED and
suitable management strategies will often be a helpful supplement
to any prescribed therapies.
8. Complementary medicines
Due to various economic, cultural and regulatory issues, many
countries exhibit a shortage of approved drugs for DED. A range of
complementary medicines have been used as alternative strategies
for the management of DED.
8.1. Herbal and natural products
Topical and oral herbal and natural products have been widely
used in many countries for thousands of years. However, relatively
few RCTs have compared herbal medicine with conventional ther￾apies due to the inherent challenges in the way herbs are pre￾scribed. Many of these therapies are based on the traditional “yin”
and “yang” theory of Chinese medicine, and therefore require that
practitioners treat dry eye patients with a combination of different
Chinese herbs [955]. While this potentially allows for treatments to
be “tailored” to the individual, it also prevents them from being
standardized, and therefore it is more difficult to study the efficacy
of these products using the gold standard RCT approach. Some
laboratory-based Level 1 studies have suggested that Chinese
medicines may play a role in regulating the immune balance of Th1
to Th2 cells in serum, as well as the expression of aquaporin-1 and
aquaporin-5 [956,957]. However, the mechanism of action of such
products remains elusive and clear demonstration of the effec￾tiveness of herbs in treating DED requires further work. There are
also a number of reported side effects, including nausea, abdominal
pain, diarrhoea, minor gastrointestinal symptoms, mild hepatic
dysfunction and renal dysfunction that need to be considered when
adopting such treatment options [958].
In a Level 1 study involving 80 participants, Chi-Ju-Di-Huang￾Wan, a commonly prescribed herb, was shown to significantly
improve the TBUT of dry eye subjects after 4 weeks [959]. Several
Level 2 and 3 studies have investigated the optimal combination of
herbs needed to treat Sjogren syndrome € [444,955,958]. A Level 1
double-masked RCT with 240 subjects showed that a six-week
course of ShengJinRun ZaoYangXue granules for primary Sjogren €
syndrome improved the symptoms of dry mouth, dry eye, and low
tear flow rates, although there was no improvement in clinical signs
[960].
8.2. Honey
For centuries, some cultures have considered that bee products,
such as royal jelly and honey, exhibit medicinal properties. In a
variety of lab-based and clinical Level 2 and 3 studies these prod￾ucts have been reported to have antibacterial, anti-inflammatory,
antioxidant and wound healing properties [961e964]. Oral
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 606
administration of royal jelly can restore tear secretion capacity in a
blink-suppressed rat dry eye model [965]. Topical application of
Manuka honey eye drops can reduce the number of bacteria iso- 
lated from the eyelid margin and conjunctiva in patients with DED
[966].AManuka honey Cyclopower microemulsion eye cream with 
antimicrobial activity confirmed in preclinical testing [967], has
demonstrated safety in a Phase I human tolerability trial [968].
Although promising, further clinical trials are needed to assess the
therapeutic role of this formulation and other bee products.
8.3. Milk
Breast milk is a relatively common traditional medicine for
treating a variety of eye conditions in some countries [969,970].
Topical instillation of breast milk, especially colostrum, has been
shown to be effective in treating infant epiphora in a Level 3 study
[971], and preventing neonatal conjunctivitis in a Level 1 study
[972], through inhibition of a variety of common ocular pathogens
[973e975].
In a small Level 3 study, 10 of 11 patients reported improvement
in dryness symptoms and demonstrated some improvement in
clinical signs after being treated with bovine colostrum lactoserum
[976]. A rabbit study showed that topical fucosyl-lactose, a natural
oligosaccharide in human colostrum, can significantly improve tear
volume and TBUT in an atropine-induced dry eye model [977].
Breast milk also contains abundant lactoferrin (see section 6.3),
which makes it a potent candidate for a natural remedy for dry eye
treatment.
8.4. Acupuncture
Acupuncture is a long-standing intervention in East Asian
countries to treat a wide variety of conditions. However, there are
no common methods for acupuncture, which makes it challenging
to study in a systematic manner. It has been suggested that stim￾ulation of the peripheral nervous system with a concomitant cen￾tral effect could be the mechanism of pain relief, which might then
impact pain perception, alter inflammation or peripheral sensa￾tions, or “retrain” peripheral nerves in pain sensation [978].
Acupuncture has been reported to improve TBUT, Schirmer
scores and corneal staining to a greater degree than artificial tears
in Level 1 studies [979,980], a Level 2 study [981], and a meta￾analysis report [982]. Another Level 1 study demonstrated that
tear volume, as assessed by changes in tear meniscus parameters,
was significantly improved after a four week treatment with
acupuncture [983]. Some studies have assessed the effects of
related procedures in the management of DED. Two well-controlled
clinical studies showed that both laser acupuncture and silver spike
point (SSP) electro-therapy were as effective as traditional
acupuncture in alleviating symptoms and increasing tear secretion
in subjects with dry eye [984,985].
One shortcoming of many of these studies is that the control
used to assess the relative efficacy of acupuncture was artificial
tears, as opposed to sham needling. In one RCT, 42 participants with
DED were enrolled to accept either “true” or sham acupuncture
[986]. After four weeks, subjects from both groups reported a sig￾nificant improvement in symptoms, with no significant differences
between the two groups. This led the authors to conclude that
sham and true acupuncture were equally effective for treating
symptoms of DED.
9. Management of psychological aspects of DED
DED has been shown to be associated with psychological factors,
such as depression and stress [987e989]. The prevalence of sleep
and mood disorders has been shown to be significantly higher in
people with DED [990]. Recognizing the importance of positive
psychology, the World Health Organization considers ‘happiness’ to
be an important component of general health [991]. Positive psy￾chology, including a state of happiness, is considered to improve
human function and promote people to lead more successful lives
[992]. These findings have led to research interest in the influence
of ‘happiness’ on the clinical expression of DED.
A recent Japanese study reported that people with higher levels
of subjective happiness also had fewer self-reported dry eye
symptoms; this association was not evident for objective indicators
of DED [993]. Furthermore, participants with the lowest happiness
scores reported significant DED symptoms but showed no objective
clinical markers of DED. The authors concluded that there was a
need for future studies investigating whether positive psychologi￾cal interventions may be beneficial in the management of DED.
Findings from a cross-sectional survey-based study describing
an association between DED and lower levels of physical activity
and sedentary behavior [994], has also raised the question as to
whether physical activity may influence the quality of the tear film.
Although exercise has been proposed to be a potentially useful
adjunct in the management of DED [994], clinical evidence to
support this approach is currently lacking. In broad support of this
hypothesis, exercise training for eight weeks in a mouse model of
type II diabetes, was found to increase tear secretion [995].
10. Staged management algorithm
The management of DED is complicated due to its multifactorial
etiology. Expanding upon the simple credo that “diagnosis pre￾cedes therapy” means that clinicians must make their best efforts to
identify the degree to which EDE (likely related to MGD), ADDE
and/or other ocular surface conditions are contributing to the pa￾tient's presentation. This aspect of determining the major causative
factors behind the DED is critical to appropriate management.
Fig. 1 presents, diagrammatically, an approach to the manage￾ment of DED. Prior to selecting the appropriate management to
undertake, questioning and diagnostic testing must be undertaken
to determine that the patient does indeed have DED and then
whether they are broadly showing more signs of EDE or ADDE.
Further details on the appropriate tests to confirm a diagnosis of
DED and then the major etiological factors can be found in the TFOS
DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology Report [10]. Following confir￾mation of a DED diagnosis, disease severity along with etiological
subtyping, will allow an appropriate treatment plan to be
developed.
The majority of patients with DED show some relationship be￾tween symptom severity and signs. However, it is well established
that a proportion of patients exhibit conflicting signs and symp￾toms [996e998]. In situations where there are chronic symptoms
but limited signs that are refractory to treatment, then neuropathic
pain, rather than DED, should be considered. This is described in
greater detail in the TFOS DEWS II Pain and Sensation Report [539].
In contrast, in patients where there are few symptoms but clear
signs of DED, then reduced corneal sensitivity, suggestive of neu￾rotrophic keratopathy, is a possibility [999e1001], and prescribing
treatment may be particularly important to avoid ongoing damage.
The ultimate aim of DED management is to restore homeostasis
of the ocular surface, by breaking the vicious cycle of the disease,
and offering long-term options to prevent a return to the vicious
cycle and a resurgence of symptoms. While there are treatments
that may be specifically indicated for one particular aspect of an
individual patient's ocular surface condition, a number of treat￾ments might appropriately be recommended for multiple aspects
of a DED presentation. The management of DED typically involves
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 607
dealing with chronic sequelae that require ongoing management,
rather than short-term treatment, to eliminate the dry eye issues.
The management algorithm presented in this report does not
represent a rigid stepwise approach, but rather should be viewed as
an organizational tool to use when initiating treatment of DED, to
select interventions likely to provide most benefit. The algorithm
takes into account both disease etiology and severity, progressing
from more generalized treatments for disease of mixed etiology, to
more advanced and specific treatments aimed at particular aspects
of the disease pathophysiology. Risk/benefit and cost consider￾ations will also necessarily contribute to choices made between
treatment options [5e9,17].
Management algorithms are often constructed to recommend a
sequence of treatments according to the stage of disease, but this
not possible for DED as it is a complex condition that varies, both in
severity and in character, from patient to patient. Nonetheless, with
the intention of assisting eye care practitioners to fashion a logical,
evidence-based treatment approach, the following management
algorithm (Table 16) is proposed. For patients who do not respond
to a given level of management, or who exhibit more severe DED,
the next level of management is recommended and, in some cases,
the previous therapy may be continued, in addition to any new
therapies (Fig. 1 and Table 16). In general, management approaches
begin with conventional, low-risk and commonly available thera￾pies such as over-the-counter lubricants for early stage disease, and
progress to more advanced therapies for more severe forms of DED
[1002]. However, it is acknowledged that the significant heteroge￾neity that exists in the DED patient population precludes an overly
formulaic approach and it would be anticipated that these recom￾mendations would be adapted, by eye care practitioners, to best
suit individual patients.
It is important, after initiating any of these management stra￾tegies, that careful follow-up occurs to ensure patients are suc￾cessfully instituting the recommended management option(s) and
to establish improvements in symptoms and/or signs. The time
frame over which therapy should be applied before it can be
concluded that no improvement will occur is related to both the
individual response and the therapy being considered. A review of
the literature suggests that most studies are conducted for 1e3
months (with the exception of cyclosporine, where therapeutic
action can take several months to occur and study periods are
typically longer than 3 months) [595e597] and so changes beyond
this time period for the majority of treatments would appear
unlikely.
If there is clinical evidence of more severe complications asso￾ciated with the dry eye presentation, such as advanced eyelid
involvement (chalazia, trichiasis), corneal neovascularization or
clinical signs of microbial infection, the clinician will need to
consider additional approaches. Examples could potentially include
intralesional steroid or excision of chalazia, eyelash epilation or
cryotherapy for trichiasis, and antiangiogenic drugs for neo￾vascularization. A full outline of these management strategies is
beyond the scope of this report.
In summary, the management of DED remains something of an
art, not easily lending itself to a rigid, evidence-based algorithm
that accommodates all patients with dry eye symptoms and signs.
All eye care providers who treat DED must exercise their clinical
expertise to judge the significance of each of the varied pathogenic
processes (aqueous deficiency, MGD, inflammation, etc.) that may
manifest similar subjective complaints and similar signs of dis￾rupted ocular surface homeostasis. On-going research will continue
to improve our understanding of the relative treatment efficacy of
different interventions for individual causes of DED, and determine
synergistic therapeutic actions.
11. Future research directions
Since publication of the original TFOS DEWS report [1], the
available options to treat DED have increased dramatically. The last
decade has seen new developments in topical lubricants
Fig. 1. Diagrammatic representation of the process associated with the management of DED.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 608
(particularly lipid-containing drops), autologous serum options,
and punctal plug designs. There have been many new de￾velopments to help with lid hygiene, as well as the availability of
new treatments for demodex infestation, devices to manage MGD,
and rigid gas permeable scleral lenses. In addition to the various
options to manage the inflammatory processes associated with
DED that have come to market, the impact of dietary modifications
(particularly the value of EFA supplements) is better understood
and the potential value of various complementary medicines has
come under discussion.
However, review of the published literature to date indicates
that much more research is necessary to confirm the value of many
of these treatment options. Clinical dogma concerning the pre￾scribing of many management options is often poorly supported by
Level 1 studies. Many studies have been conducted on small
numbers samples of patients who are often poorly categorized.
There are many opportunities for clinicians and researchers to
conduct studies that would add to the body of knowledge available
that would help guide the future management of patients with
DED.
While the prescribing of OTC lubricants remains the mainstay of
early treatment for DED, very few RCTs have compared inter￾product superiority. With a wide variety of compositions now
available, further work in this area is warranted. Of particular value
would be studies comparing the efficacy of products with and
without lipids in evaporative and in aqueous deficient DED. Studies
to determine the impact of various formulations on tear film os￾molarity and the duration of treatment required for changes to
occur are also worthy of consideration, particularly for lubricants
expected to influence tear film stability. Ocular surface compati￾bility comparisons between unit dose non-preserved formulations
and formulations containing newer “softer” preservatives that are
delivered in multidose bottles with one-way valves, are also
missing from the literature. Finally, studies to look at the potential
for topical antioxidants to impact the signs and symptoms of DED
would be valuable.
The most widely used tear conservation approach is punctal
plugging. However, given the acceptance of the importance of
inflammation to the continued cycle of DED, little has been pub￾lished on the potential for such a management option to impact
ocular surface inflammation and this warrants some consideration.
Other methods to enhance tear conservation include moisture
chamber spectacles and local humidifiers, which are growing in
popularity. However, very few studies have investigated their effi-
cacy in a controlled manner.
Tear stimulation, via drugs or devices, is also of growing interest.
Topical secretagogues are available in some markets and a novel
intranasal tear neurostimulator device recently received FDA
approval for acute tear production. Both approaches appear of
potential value, but further Level 1 studies are needed to confirm
their efficacy.
The value of lid hygiene to the successful management of DED is
well accepted. However, careful review of the literature shows that
very few Level 1 studies exist. What does the use of commercial lid
scrubs do to the microbiota of the lids? Which bacteria are
affected? How often and for how long should lid scrubs be per￾formed? What does a maintenance regimen look like? What format
of lid scrubs positively impacts tear osmolarity, tear film inflam￾matory markers or tear film stability? Is there an optimal combi￾nation of lid scrubs that can be used with other simple
management options such as oral EFA supplementation and topical
drops? Does the application of topical antibiotics to the eyelids in
combination with lid scrubs have a positive impact on DED? What
is the impact of tea tree oil based lid scrubs on ocular surface
inflammation? This entire area is rich with opportunities for future
study.
Since the TFOS MGD report was published [2], interest in the
management of MGD has grown enormously. The value of warm
compresses along with physical evacuation of the blocked glands is
well accepted. However, the effectivity of warming devices appears
to differ, and key features remain to be elucidated. Should heating
be combined with massaging? How should in-office and at-home
management be combined for optimum effect? In addition,
Table 16
Staged management & treatment recommendations for dry eye diseasea,b,c
.
Step 1:

Education regarding the condition, its management, treatment and prognosis

Modification of local environment

Education regarding potential dietary modifications (including oral essential
fatty acid supplementation)

Identification and potential modification/elimination of offending systemic
and topical medications

Ocular lubricants of various types (if MGD is present, then consider lipid￾containing supplements)

Lid hygiene and warm compresses of various types
Step 2:
If above options are inadequate consider:

Non-preserved ocular lubricants to minimize preservative-induced toxicity

Tea tree oil treatment for Demodex (if present)

Tear conservation

Punctal occlusion

Moisture chamber spectacles/goggles

Overnight treatments (such as ointment or moisture chamber devices)

In-office, physical heating and expression of the meibomian glands (including
device-assisted therapies, such as LipiFlow)

In-office intense pulsed light therapy for MGD

Prescription drugs to manage DEDd

Topical antibiotic or antibiotic/steroid combination applied to the lid
margins for anterior blepharitis (if present)

Topical corticosteroid (limited-duration)

Topical secretagogues

Topical non-glucocorticoid immunomodulatory drugs (such as
cyclosporine)

Topical LFA-1 antagonist drugs (such as lifitegrast)

Oral macrolide or tetracycline antibiotics
Step 3:
If above options are inadequate consider:

Oral secretagogues

Autologous/allogeneic serum eye drops

Therapeutic contact lens options

Soft bandage lenses

Rigid scleral lenses
Step 4:
If above options are inadequate consider:

Topical corticosteroid for longer duration

Amniotic membrane grafts

Surgical punctal occlusion

Other surgical approaches (eg tarsorrhaphy, salivary gland transplantation)
MGD e meibomian gland dysfunction; DED e dry eye disease. a Potential variations within the disease spectrum are acknowledged to exist
between patients and the management options listed above are not intended to be
exclusive. The severity and etiology of the DED state will dictate the range and
number of management options selected from one or more steps.
b One or more options concurrently within each category can be considered
within that step of the dry eye disease state. Options within a category are not
ranked according to importance and may be equally valid. c It should be noted that the evidence available to support the various manage￾ment options differs and will inevitably be lower for newer management options.
Thus, each treatment option should be considered in accordance with the level of
evidence available at the time management is instigated.
d The use of prescription drugs needs to be considered in the context of the in￾dividual patient presentation, and the relative level of evidence supporting their use
for that specific indication, as this group of agents differs widely in mechanism of
action.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 609
further work is needed in this area to determine if treatment with
oral antibiotics is valuable in even lower severity cases, to what
extent a maintenance regime is needed, and whether dietary
modifications can help in the management of MGD. We might hope
to understand more fully the role lipid-based lubricants can play in
conjunction with physical therapies, the underlying pathophysio￾logical process that explains why IPL can be successful, whether
intraductal probing is damaging over the long term and how often
it can be undertaken, and how long debridement scaling over the
meibomian gland orifices lasts before it needs to be repeated.
These, and many more studies, would enhance our ability to
manage MGD in patients with DED.
Despite recognition of the role of inflammation in DED, there
continues to be a shortage of Level 1 studies investigating the long￾term role of newer topical steroids and NSAIDs on the management
of DED. Further work is also required to investigate the potential for
steroids or NSAIDs in a pulse-dose form to break the cycle of DED
and to clarify appropriate dosing schedules.
The increasing availability of a variety of topical biologics and
commercialisation of a new LFA-1 antagonist opens up many new
opportunities to investigate the role of these new topical agents in
ameliorating a wide variety of symptoms and signs in patients with
DED.
The role of systemic antibiotics (tetracyclines and macrolides) in
the management of DED is relatively poorly understood and
optimal dosing schedules remain under intense debate, with a wide
variety of suggestions published. Further work to understand their
role and to predict which patients are most likely to benefit from
their use is warranted.
There is growing evidence that dietary modifications, notably
increased water intake and EFA supplementation, can impact DED.
However, selection of the appropriate EFAs to ingest, their relative
ratios, the daily dosing regimen, impact on tear film inflammatory
markers, goblet cell density, tear stability and osmolarity all require
further study.
Finally, a number of herbal and natural products are increasingly
being used to manage patients with DED, with various herbs and
honey showing promise. These topical and systemic agents, along
with acupuncture, require more Level 1 studies to gain widespread
acceptance as potential management options for DED.
Reflecting on all of the available evidence to date, a staged
management algorithm (Table 16) that presents a step-wise
approach to implementing the various management and thera￾peutic options according to disease severity was derived. While this
exercise indicated that differentiating between aqueous-deficient
and evaporative dry eye disease was important in selecting the
most appropriate management strategy, it also highlighted chal￾lenges, based on the limited evidence currently available, in pre￾dicting relative benefits of specific management options, in
managing the two DED subtypes. As diagnostic testing of signs and
symptoms improves, and better differentiation of patients by DED
subtype is achieved, there is a growing need to understand the
relative benefits of the many available options in managing ADDE
and EDE.
While much research is necessary to provide the answers to the
questions posed above, the expanding range of possible solutions
and the continued backing of industry and grant-funding agencies
provides a positive outlook for affected patients moving forward.
Financial disclosures
L. Jones, Chair: Advanced Vision Research, Alcon, Allergan,
Contamac, CooperVision, Essilor, Inflamax, Johnson & Johnson
Vision Care, Ocular Dynamics, Oculus, Safilens, TearLab, TearScience
(F); Alcon, CooperVision, Johnson & Johnson Vision Care (C) (R).
J. Benitez de Castillo Sanchez: Abbvie, Alcon, Allergan, Angelini,
Bausch + Lomb, Dompe, Esteve, Horus, Laboratoires Th ea, Novartis, 
Santen (F) (C).
R. Dana: Eleven Biotherapeutics (I); Alcon, Allergan, Cambium,
Eleven Biotherapeutics, NovaBay, Rigel, Shire (C).
S. Deng: Chiesi Farmaceutici S.P.A. (C).
P. N. Dong: None.
L. Downie: Alcon, Allergan, CooperVision (F).
G. Geerling; TearLab, TearScience (F); TearLab (I); Allergan,
Bausch + Lomb, Laboratoires Thea, Oculus, Santen, TearLab, Tear- 
Science (C).
R. Y. Hida: None.
D. Jacobs: BostonSight (E); TECLens (C).
D. Korb: Inventor relative to dry eye (P).
Y. Liu: Co-owner of patent with Schepens Eye Research Institute
(P).
K. Y. Seo: None.
J. Tauber: Eleven Biotherapeutics, Kala, Shire (F); Shire (C);
Allergan, Eleven Biotherapeutics, Shire (R).
T. Wakamatsu: None.
J. Xu: None.
J. P. Craig, Harmonisation member and Vice-Chair: Oculeve,
Allergan, Manuka Health NZ, E-Swin, CooperVision, Alcon, Optima
Pharmaceuticals, OPSM NZ, Akorn, Medmont (F); Carl Zeiss Medi￾tec, Eye Institute Auckland (C).
F (Financial Support), I (Personal Financial Interest), E
(Employment), C (Consultant), P (Patent), R (Recipient), N (No
Commercial Relationship), S (non-remunerative).
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the TFOS membership and, in
particular, the following individuals for assistance with various
sections of this report: Francisco Amparo, Penny Asbell, Caroline
Blackie, Stephanie Cox, Teresa Douglass, Anat Galor, Pedram Ham￾rah, Jiaxu Hong, Deborah Jacobs, Ahmad Kheirkhah, Nino Longo,
Amy Nau, Mark Rosenblatt, Benjamin Sullivan, Kunal Suri, Stepha￾nie Wong, Sabrina Zappia.
References
[1] Management and therapy of dry eye disease: report of the management and
therapy subcommittee of the international dry eye WorkShop. Ocul Surf
2007;2007(5):163e78.
[2] Nelson JD, Shimazaki J, Benitez-del-Castillo JM, Craig JP, McCulley JP, Den S,
et al. The international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of
the definition and classification subcommittee. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2011;52(4):1930e7.
[3] Craig JP, Nichols KK, Akpek EK, Caffery B, Dua HS, Joo CK, et al. TFOS DEWS II
Definition and Classification report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:276e83.
[4] Lemp MA, Crews LA, Bron AJ, Foulks GN, Sullivan BD. Cornea 2012;31(5):
472e8.
[5] Williamson JF, Huynh K, Weaver MA, Davis RM. Perceptions of dry eye dis￾ease management in current clinical practice. Eye Contact Lens 2014;40(2):
111e5.
[6] Song JS, Hyon JY, Lee D, Chung E, Choi C, Lee J, et al. Current practice pattern
for dry eye patients in South Korea: a multicenter study. Korean J Oph￾thalmol 2014;28(2):115e21.
[7] Sy A, O'Brien KS, Liu MP, Cuddapah PA, Acharya NR, Lietman TM, et al. Expert
opinion in the management of aqueous deficient dry eye disease (DED). BMC
Ophthalmol 2015;15:133.
[8] Downie LE, Keller PR, Vingrys AJ. An evidence-based analysis of Australian
optometrists' dry eye practices. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90(12):1385e95.
[9] Downie LE, Rumney N, Gad A, Keller PR, Purslow C, Vingrys AJ. Comparing
self-reported optometric dry eye clinical practices in Australia and the
United Kingdom: is there scope for practice improvement? Ophthalmic
Physiol Opt 2016;36(2):140e51.
[10] Wolffsohn JS, Arita R, Chalmers R, Djalilian A, Dogru M, Dumbleton K, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:539e74.
[11] Tong L, Petznick A, Lee S, Tan J. Choice of artificial tear formulation for pa￾tients with dry eye: where do we start? Cornea 2012;31(Suppl 1):S32e6.
[12] Murube J, Paterson A, Murube E. Classification of artificial tears. I:
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 610
composition and properties. Adv Exp Med Biol 1998;438:693e704.
[13] Murube J, Murube A, Zhuo C. Classification of artificial tears. II: additives and
commercial formulas. Adv Exp Med Biol 1998;438:705e15.
[14] Dogru M, Nakamura M, Shimazaki J, Tsubota K. Changing trends in the
treatment of dry-eye disease. Expert Opin Invest Drugs 2013;22(12):
1581e601.
[15] Dogru M, Tsubota K. Pharmacotherapy of dry eye. Expert Opin Pharmacother
2011;12(3):325e34.
[16] Pucker AD, Ng SM, Nichols JJ. Over the counter (OTC) artificial tear drops for
dry eye syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;2:CD009729.
[17] Downie LE, Keller PR. A pragmatic approach to dry eye diagnosis: evidence
into practice. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92(12):1189e97.
[18] Wegener AR, Meyer LM, Schonfeld CL. Effect of viscous agents on corneal €
density in dry eye disease. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2015;31(8):504e8.
[19] Yu F, Liu X, Zhong Y, Guo X, Li M, Mao Z, et al. Sodium hyaluronate decreases
ocular surface toxicity induced by benzalkonium chloride-preserved lata￾noprost: an in vivo study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:3385e93.
[20] Doughty MJ, Glavin S. Efficacy of different dry eye treatments with artificial
tears or ocular lubricants: a systematic review. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt
2009;29(6):573e83.
[21] Kamel S, Ali N, Jahangir K, Shah SM, El-Gendy AA. Pharmaceutical signifi-
cance of cellulose: a review. Express Polym Lett 2008;2(11):758e78.
[22] Garrett Q, Simmons PA, Xu S, Vehige J, Zhao Z, Ehrmann K, et al. Carboxy￾methylcellulose binds to human corneal epithelial cells and is a modulator of
corneal epithelial wound healing. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48(4):
1559e67.
[23] Garrett Q, Xu S, Simmons PA, Vehige J, Xie RZ, Kumar A, et al. Carboxymethyl
cellulose stimulates rabbit corneal epithelial wound healing. Curr Eye Res
2008;33(7):567e73.
[24] Bruix A, Adan A, Casaroli-Marano RP. Efficacy of sodium carboxymethylcel￾lulose in the treatment of dry eye syndrome. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol 2006;81:
85e92.
[25] Noecker RJ. Comparison of initial treatment response to two enhanced-vis￾cosity artificial tears. Eye Contact Lens 2006;32(3):148e52.
[26] Lee JH, Ahn HS, Kim EK, Kim TI. Efficacy of sodium hyaluronate and
carboxymethylcellulose in treating mild to moderate dry eye disease. Cornea
2011;30(2):175e9.
[27] Rah MJ. A review of hyaluronan and its ophthalmic applications. Optometry
2011;82(1):38e43.
[28] Inoue M, Katakami C. The effect of hyaluronic acid on corneal epithelial cell
proliferation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1993;34(7):2313e5.
[29] Stiebel-Kalish H, Gaton DD, Weinberger D, Loya N, Schwartz-Ventik M,
Solomon A. A comparison of the effect of hyaluronic acid versus gentamicin
on corneal epithelial healing. Eye (Lond) 1998;12(5):829e33.
[30] Gomes JA, Amankwah R, Powell-Richards A, Dua HS. Sodium hyaluronate
(hyaluronic acid) promotes migration of human corneal epithelial cells in
vitro. Br J Ophthalmol 2004;88(6):821e5.
[31] Camillieri G, Bucolo C, Rossi S, Drago F. Hyaluronan-induced stimulation of
corneal wound healing is a pure pharmacological effect. J Ocul Pharmacol
Ther 2004;20(6):548e53.
[32] Yang G, Espandar L, Mamalis N, Prestwich GD. A cross-linked hyaluronan gel
accelerates healing of corneal epithelial abrasion and alkali burn injuries in
rabbits. Vet Ophthalmol 2010;13(3):144e50.
[33] Ho WT, Chiang TH, Chang SW, Chen YH, Hu FR, Wang IJ. Enhanced corneal
wound healing with hyaluronic acid and high-potassium artificial tears. Clin
Exp Optom 2013;96(6):536e41.
[34] Pisarcik M, Bakos D, Ceppan M. Non-Newtonian properties of hyaluronic acid 
aqueous solution. Colloids Surf A 1995;97:197e202.
[35] Johnson ME, Murphy PJ, Boulton M. Carbomer and sodium hyaluronate
eyedrops for moderate dry eye treatment. Optom Vis Sci 2008;85(8):750e7.
[36] Lekhanont K, Chuckpaiwong V, Vongthongsri A, Sangiampornpanit T. Effects
of sodium hyaluronate on wavefront aberrations in dry eye patients. Optom
Vis Sci 2014;91(1):39e46.
[37] Kinoshita S, Oshiden K, Awamura S, Suzuki H, Nakamichi N, Yokoi N,
Rebamipide Ophthalmic Suspension Phase 3 Study Group. A randomized,
multicenter phase 3 study comparing 2% rebamipide (OPC-12759) with 0.1%
sodium hyaluronate in the treatment of dry eye. Ophthalmology
2013;120(6):1158e65.
[38] Takamura Etsuko, Tsubota Kazuo, Watanabe Hitoshi, Ohashi Yuichi. A
randomised, double-masked comparison study of diquafosol versus sodium
hyaluronate ophthalmic solutions in dry eye patients. Br J Ophthalmol
2012;96(10):1310e5.
[39] Cheema A, Aziz T, Mirza SA, Siddiqi A, Maheshwary N, Khan MA. Sodium
hyaluronate eye drops in the treatment of dry eye disease: an open label,
uncontrolled, multi-centre trial. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad 2012 Jul￾Dec;24(3e4):14e6.
[40] Baudouin C, Cochener B, Pisella PJ, Girard B, Pouliquen P, Cooper H, et al.
Randomized, phase III study comparing osmoprotective carboxymethylcel￾lulose with sodium hyaluronate in dry eye disease. Eur J Ophthalmol 2012
Sep-Oct;22(5):751e61.
[41] Pinto-Fraga J, Lopez-de la Rosa A, Blazquez Arauzo F, Urbano Rodriguez R,
Gonzalez-Garcia MJ. Efficacy and safety of 0.2% hyaluronic acid in the
management of dry eye disease. Eye Contact Lens 2017;43:57e63.
[42] Park Y, Song JS, Choi CY, Yoon KC, Lee HK, Kim HS. A randomized multicenter
Study comparing 0.1%, 0.15%, and 0.3% sodium hyaluronate with 0.05%
cyclosporine in the treatment of dry eye. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2017;33(2):
66e72.
[43] She Y, Li J, Xiao B, Lu H, Liu H, Simmons PA, et al. Evaluation of a novel
artificial tear in the prevention and treatment of dry eye in an animal model.
J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2015;31(9):525e30.
[44] Simmons PA, Liu H, Carlisle-Wilcox C, Vehige JG. Efficacy and safety of two
new formulations of artificial tears in subjects with dry eye disease: a 3-
month, multicenter, active-controlled, randomized trial. Clin Ophthalmol
2015;9:665e75.
[45] Springs C. Novel ocular lubricant containing an intelligent delivery system:
details of its mechanism of action. Dev Ophthalmol 2010;45:139e47.
[46] Benelli U. Systane lubricant eye drops in the management of ocular dryness.
Clin Ophthalmol 2011;5:783e90.
[47] Christensen MT. Corneal staining reductions observed after treatment with
Systane lubricant eye drops. Adv Ther 2008;25(11):1191e9.
[48] Ousler GW, Michaelson C, Christensen MT. An evaluation of tear film
breakup time extension and ocular protection index scores among three
marketed lubricant eye drops. Cornea 2007;26(8):949e52.
[49] Cervan-Lopez I, Saenz-Frances-San-Baldomero F, Benitez-Del-Castillo JM,
Garcia-Sanchez J. Reduction of corneal permeability in patients treated with
HP-guar: a fluorophotometric study. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol 2006;81:327e32.
[50] Moon SW, Hwang JH, Chung SH, Nam KH. The impact of artificial tears
containing hydroxypropyl guar on mucous layer. Cornea 2010;29(12):
1430e5.
[51] Uchiyama E, Di Pascuale MA, Butovich IA, McCulley JP. Impact on ocular
surface evaporation of an artificial tear solution containing hydroxypropyl
guar. Eye Contact Lens 2008;34(6):331e4.
[52] Sanchez MA, Arriola-Villalobos P, Torralbo-Jim enez P, Gir on N, de la Heras B, 
Herrero Vanrell R, et al. The effect of preservative-free HP-Guar on dry eye
after phacoemulsification: a flow cytometric study. Eye (Lond) 2010;24(8):
1331e7.
[53] Gifford P, Evans BJ, Morris J. A clinical evaluation of Systane. Cont Lens Anter
Eye 2006;29(1):31e40.
[54] Rangarajan R, Kraybill B, Ogundele A, Ketelson HA. Effects of a hyaluronic
acid/hydroxypropyl guar artificial tear solution on protection, recovery, and
lubricity in models of corneal epithelium. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2015;31(8):
491e7.
[55] Werblin TP, Rheinstrom SD, Kaufman HE. The use of slow-release artificial
tears in the long-term management of keratitis sicca. Ophthalmology
1981;88(1):78e81.
[56] McDonald M, D'Aversa G, Perry HD, Wittpenn JR, Donnenfeld ED,
Nelinson DS. Hydroxypropyl cellulose ophthalmic inserts (lacrisert) reduce
the signs and symptoms of dry eye syndrome and improve patient quality of
life. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 2009;107:214e21.
[57] The definition and classification of dry eye disease: report of the definition
and classification subcommittee of the international dry eye WorkShop. Ocul
Surf 2007;2007(5):75e92.
[58] Gilbard JP, Rossi SR, Heyda KG. Ophthalmic solutions, the ocular surface, and
a unique therapeutic artificial tear formulation. Am J Ophthalmol
1989;107(4):348e55.
[59] Gilbard JP, Rossi SR. An electrolyte-based solution that increases corneal
glycogen and conjunctival goblet-cell density in a rabbit model for kerato￾conjunctivitis sicca. Ophthalmology 1992;99(4):600e4.
[60] Gilbard JP. Dry eye: pharmacological approaches, effects, and progress. CLAO
J 1996;22(2):141e5.
[61] Troiano P, Monaco G. Effect of hypotonic 0.4% hyaluronic acid drops in dry
eye patients: a cross-over study. Cornea 2008;27(10):1126e30.
[62] Baeyens V, Bron A, Baudouin C, Vismed/Hylovis Study Group. Efficacy of
0.18% hypotonic sodium hyaluronate ophthalmic solution in the treatment
of signs and symptoms of dry eye disease. J Fr Ophtalmol 2012;35(6):412e9.
[63] Sullivan BD, Crews LA, Sonmez B, de la Paz MF, Comert E, Charoenrook V, €
et al. Clinical utility of objective tests for dry eye disease: variability over
time and implications for clinical trials and disease management. Cornea
2012;31(9):1000e8.
[64] Scuderi G, Contestabile MT, Gagliano C, Iacovello D, Scuderi L, Avitabile T.
Effects of phytoestrogen supplementation in postmenopausal women with
dry eye syndrome: a randomized clinical trial. Can J Ophthalmol 2012;47(6):
489e92.
[65] Tomlinson A, Madden LC, Simmons PA. Effectiveness of dry eye therapy
under conditions of environmental stress. Curr Eye Res 2013;38(2):229e36.
[66] Versura P, Profazio V, Giannaccare G, Fresina M, Campos EC. Discomfort
symptoms reduction and ocular surface parameters recovery with Artelac
Rebalance treatment in mild-moderate dry eye. Eur J Ophthalmol 2013 Jul￾Aug;23(4):488e95.
[67] Montani G. Intrasubject tear osmolarity changes with two different types of
eyedrops. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90(4):372e7.
[68] Lee JE, Kim NM, Yang JW, Kim SJ, Lee JS, Lee JE. A randomised controlled trial
comparing a thermal massager with artificial teardrops for the treatment of
dry eye. Br J Ophthalmol 2014;98(1):46e51.
[69] Aslan Bayhan S, Bayhan HA, Muhafız E, Bekdemir S¸ , Gürdal C. Effects of
osmoprotective eye drops on tear osmolarity in contact lens wearers. Can J
Ophthalmol 2015;50(4):283e9.
[70] Miserocchi E, Iuliano L, Berchicci L, Bandello F, Modorati G. Tear film os￾molarity in ocular mucous membrane pemphigoid. Cornea 2014;33(7):
668e72.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 611
[71] Gilbard JP, Huang AJ, Belldegrun R, Lee JS, Rossi SR, Gray KL. Open-label
crossover study of vitamin A ointment as a treatment for keratoconjuncti￾vitis sicca. Ophthalmology 1989;96(2):244e6.
[72] Finis D, Hayajneh J, Konig C, Borrelli M, Schrader S, Geerling G. Evaluation of €
an automated thermodynamic treatment (LipiFlow®) system for meibomian
gland dysfunction: a prospective, randomized, observer-masked trial. Ocul
Surf 2014;12(2):146e54.
[73] Mathers WD, Shields WJ, Sachdev MS, Petroll WM, Jester JV. Meibomian
gland morphology and tear osmolarity: changes with Accutane therapy.
Cornea 1991;10(4):286e90.
[74] Labbe A, Terry O, Brasnu E, Van Went C, Baudouin C. Tear  film osmolarity in
patients treated for glaucoma or ocular hypertension. Cornea 2012;31(9):
994e9.
[75] Lee JH, Min K, Kim SK, Kim EK, Kim TI. Inflammatory cytokine and osmolarity
changes in the tears of dry eye patients treated with topical 1% methyl￾prednisolone. Yonsei Med J 2014;55(1):203e8.
[76] Jadidi K, Panahi Y, Ebrahimi A, Mafi M, Nejat F, Sahebkar A. Topical cyclo￾sporine a for treatment of dry eye due to chronic mustard gas injury. J
Ophthalmic Vis Res 2014 Oct-Dec;9(4):417e22.
[77] Hamada S, Moore TC, Moore JE, Al-Dreihi MG, Anbari A, Shah S. Assessment
of the effect of cyclosporine-A 0.05% emulsion on the ocular surface and
corneal sensation following cataract surgery. Cont Lens Anter Eye
2016;39(1):15e9.
[78] Nelson JD, Farris RL. Sodium hyaluronate and polyvinyl alcohol artificial tear
preparations. A comparison in patients with keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Arch
Ophthalmol 1988;106(4):484e7.
[79] Iester M, Orsoni GJ, Gamba G, Taffara M, Mangiafico P, Giuffrida S, et al.
Improvement of the ocular surface using hypotonic 0.4% hyaluronic acid
drops in keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Eye (Lond) 2000;14(Pt 6):892e8.
[80] Benelli U, Nardi M, Posarelli C, Albert TG. Tear osmolarity measurement
using the TearLab Osmolarity System in the assessment of dry eye treatment
effectiveness. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2010;33(2):61e7.
[81] Comez AT, Tufan HA, Kocab € ıyık O, Gencer B. Effects of lubricating agents with
different osmolalities on tear osmolarity and other tear function tests in
patients with dry eye. Curr Eye Res 2013;38(11):1095e103.
[82] Garrett Q, Xu S, Simmons PA, Vehige J, Flanagan JL, Willcox MD. Expression
and localization of carnitine/organic cation transporter OCTN1 and OCTN2 in
ocular epithelium. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49(11):4844e9.
[83] Xu S, Flanagan JL, Simmons PA, Vehige J, Willcox MD, Garrett Q. Transport of
L-carnitine in human corneal and conjunctival epithelial cells. Mol Vis
2010;16:1823e31.
[84] Khandekar N, Willcox MD, Shih S, Simmons P, Vehige J, Garrett Q. Decrease
in hyperosmotic stress-induced corneal epithelial cell apoptosis by L-carni￾tine. Mol Vis 2013;19:1945e56.
[85] Garrett Q, Khandekar N, Shih S, Flanagan JL, Simmons P, Vehige J, et al.
Betaine stabilizes cell volume and protects against apoptosis in human
corneal epithelial cells under hyperosmotic stress. Exp Eye Res 2013;108:
33e41.
[86] Corrales RM, Luo L, Chang EY, Pflugfelder SC. Effects of osmoprotectants on
hyperosmolar stress in cultured human corneal epithelial cells. Cornea
2008;27(5):574e9.
[87] Hua X, Su Z, Deng R, Lin J, Li DQ, Pflugfelder SC. Effects of L-carnitine,
erythritol and betaine on pro-inflammatory markers in primary human
corneal epithelial cells exposed to hyperosmotic stress. Curr Eye Res
2015;40(7):657e67.
[88] Chen W, Zhang X, Li J, Wang Y, Chen Q, Hou C, et al. Efficacy of osmopro￾tectants on prevention and treatment of murine dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2013;54(9):6287e97.
[89] Baudouin C, Aragona P, Messmer EM, Tomlinson A, Calonge M, Boboridis KG,
et al. Role of hyperosmolarity in the pathogenesis and management of dry
eye disease: proceedings of the OCEAN group meeting. Ocul Surf 2013;11(4):
246e58.
[90] Chen W, Zhang X, Liu M, Zhang J, Ye Y, Lin Y, et al. Trehalose protects against
ocular surface disorders in experimental murine dry eye through suppres￾sion of apoptosis. Exp Eye Res 2009;89(3):311e8.
[91] Hovakimyan M, Ramoth T, Lobler M, Schmitz KP, Witt M, Guthoff R, et al. €
Evaluation of protective effects of trehalose on desiccation of epithelial cells
in three dimensional reconstructed human corneal epithelium. Curr Eye Res
2012;37(11):982e9.
[92] Li J, Roubeix C, Wang Y, Shi S, Liu G, Baudouin C, et al. Therapeutic efficacy of
trehalose eye drops for treatment of murine dry eye induced by an intelli￾gently controlled environmental system. Mol Vis 2012;18:317e29.
[93] Iturriaga G, Suarez R, Nova-Franco B. Trehalose metabolism: from osmo￾protection to signaling. Int J Mol Sci 2009;10(9):3793e810.
[94] Luyckx J, Baudouin C. Trehalose: an intriguing disaccharide with potential for
medical application in ophthalmology. Clin Ophthalmol 2011;5:577e81.
[95] Matsuo T. Trehalose protects corneal epithelial cells from death by drying. Br
J Ophthalmol 2001;85(5):610e2.
[96] Sarkar S, Davies JE, Huang Z, Tunnacliffe A, Rubinsztein DC. Trehalose, a
novel mTOR-independent autophagy enhancer, accelerates the clearance of
mutant huntingtin and alpha-synuclein. J Biol Chem 2007;282(8):5641e52.
[97] Cejkova J, Cejka C, Luyckx J. Trehalose treatment accelerates the healing of
UVB-irradiated corneas. Comparative immunohistochemical studies on
corneal cryostat sections and corneal impression cytology. Histol Histopathol
2012;27(8):1029e40.
[98] Baudouin C, Labbe A, Liang H, Pauly A, Brignole-Baudouin F. Preservatives in 
eyedrops: the good, the bad and the ugly. Prog Retin Eye Res 2010;29(4):
312e34.
[99] Augustin AJ, Spitznas M, Kaviani N, Meller D, Koch FH, Grus F, et al. Oxidative
reactions in the tear fluid of patients suffering from dry eyes. Graefes Arch
Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1995;233(11):694e8.
[100] Hongyok T, Chae JJ, Shin YJ, Na D, Li L, Chuck RS. Effect of chitosan-N-ace￾tylcysteine conjugate in a mouse model of botulinum toxin B-induced dry
eye. Arch Ophthalmol 2009;127(4):525e32.
[101] Kim EC, Choi JS, Joo CK. A comparison of vitamin a and cyclosporine a 0.05%
eye drops for treatment of dry eye syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol 2009;147(2):
206e13. e3.
[102] Gomes JAP, Azar DT, Baudouin C, Efron N, Hirayama M, Horwath-Winter J,
et al. TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:511e38.
[103] Stoddard AR, Koetje LR, Mitchell AK, Schotanus MP, Ubels JL. Bioavailability
of antioxidants applied to stratified human corneal epithelial cells. J Ocul
Pharmacol Ther 2013;29(7):681e7.
[104] Brzheskiy VV, Efimova EL, Vorontsova TN, Alekseev VN, Gusarevich OG,
Shaidurova KN, , et alRyabtseva AA, Andryukhina OM, Kamenskikh TG,
Sumarokova ES, Miljudin ES, Egorov EA, Lebedev OI, Surov AV, Korol AR,
Nasinnyk IO, Bezditko PA, Muzhychuk OP, Vygodin VA, Yani EV,
Savchenko AY, Karger EM, Fedorkin ON, Mironov AN, Ostapenko V,
Popeko NA, Skulachev VP, Skulachev MV. Results of a multicenter, ran￾domized, double-masked, placebo-controlled clinical study of the efficacy
and safety of Visomitin eye drops in patients with dry eye syndrome. Adv
Ther 2015;32(12):1263e79.
[105] Mostert V. Selenoprotein P: properties, functions, and regulation. Arch Bio￾chem Biophys 2000;376(2):433e8.
[106] Higuchi A, Takahashi K, Hirashima M, Kawakita T, Tsubota K. Selenoprotein P
controls oxidative stress in cornea. PLoS One 2010;5:e9911.
[107] Baudouin C. The pathology of dry eye. Surv Ophthalmol 2001;45(Suppl 2):
S211e20.
[108] Noecker R. Effects of common ophthalmic preservatives on ocular health.
Adv Ther 2001 Sep-Oct;18(5):205e15.
[109] Stewart WC, Stewart JA, Nelson LA. Ocular surface disease in patients with
ocular hypertension and glaucoma. Curr Eye Res 2011;36(5):391e8.
[110] Mantelli F, Tranchina L, Lambiase A, Bonini S. Ocular surface damage by
ophthalmic compounds. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;11(5):
464e70.
[111] Stalmans I, Sunaric Megevand G, Cordeiro MF, Hommer A, Rossetti L, Go ni F, ~
et al. Preservative-free treatment in glaucoma: who, when, and why. Eur J
Ophthalmol 2013 Jul-Aug;23(4):518e25.
[112] Anwar Z, Wellik SR, Galor A. Glaucoma therapy and ocular surface disease:
current literature and recommendations. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2013;24(2):
136e43.
[113] Pinheiro R, Panfil C, Schrage N, Dutescu RM. The impact of glaucoma med￾ications on corneal wound healing. J Glaucoma 2016;25(1):122e7.
[114] Chen W, Zhang Z, Hu J, Xie H, Pan J, Dong N, et al. Changes in rabbit corneal
innervation induced by the topical application of benzalkonium chloride.
Cornea 2013;32(12):1599e606.
[115] Lin Z, He H, Zhou T, Liu X, Wang Y, He H, et al. A mouse model of limbal stem
cell deficiency induced by topical medication with the preservative benzal￾konium chloride. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54(9):6314e25.
[116] Kaercher T, Honig D, Barth W. How the most common preservative affects €
the Meibomian lipid layer. Orbit 1999;18(2):89e97.
[117] Schrage N, Frentz M, Spoeler F. The Ex Vivo Eye Irritation Test (EVEIT) in
evaluation of artificial tears: Purite-preserved versus unpreserved eye drops.
Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2012;250(9):1333e40.
[118] Jee D, Park SH, Kim MS, Kim EC. Antioxidant and inflammatory cytokine in
tears of patients with dry eye syndrome treated with preservative-free
versus preserved eye drops. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55(8):5081e9.
[119] Bernauer W, Thiel MA, Kurrer M, Heiligenhaus A, Rentsch KM, Schmitt A,
et al. Corneal calcification following intensified treatment with sodium
hyaluronate artificial tears. Br J Ophthalmol 2006;90(3):285e8.
[120] Imayasu M, Hori Y, Cavanagh HD. Effects of multipurpose contact lens care
solutions and their ingredients on membrane-associated mucins of human
corneal epithelial cells. Eye Contact Lens 2010;36(6):361e6.
[121] Lehmann DM, Cavet ME, Richardson ME. Nonclinical safety evaluation of
boric acid and a novel borate-buffered contact lens multi-purpose solution,
Biotrue multi-purpose solution. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2010;33(Suppl 1):
S24e32.
[122] Pelton R, Hu Z, Ketelson H, Meadows D. Reversible flocculation with
hydroxypropyl guar-borate, a labile anionic polyelectrolyte. Langmuir
2009;25(1):192e5.
[123] Khanal A, Cui Y, Zhang L, Pelton R, Ren Y, Ketelson H, et al. Cationic liposome
colloidal stability in the presence of guar derivatives suggests depletion in￾teractions may be operative in artificial tears. Biomacromolecules
2010;11(9):2460e4.
[124] Saarinen-Savolainen P, Jarvinen T, Araki-Sasaki K, Watanabe H, Urtti A. €
Evaluation of cytotoxicity of various ophthalmic drugs, eye drop excipients
and cyclodextrins in an immortalized human corneal epithelial cell line.
Pharm Res 1998;15(8):1275e80.
[125] Viaud-Quentric K, Lefranc-Jullien S, Feraille L, Elena PP. Long-term tolerance
of preservative-free eye drops containing macrogol hydroxystearate as an
excipient. J Fr Ophtalmol 2016;39(2):156e63.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 612
[126] Smedowski A, Paterno JJ, Toropainen E, Sinha D, Wylegala E, Kaarniranta K.
Excipients of preservative-free latanoprost induced inflammatory response
and cytotoxicity in immortalized human HCE-2 corneal epithelial cells. J
Biochem Pharmacol Res 2014;2:175e84.
[127] Gensheimer WG, Kleinman DM, Gonzalez MO, Sobti D, Cooper ER, Smits G,
et al. Novel formulation of glycerin 1% artificial tears extends tear film break￾up time compared with Systane lubricant eye drops. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther
2012;28(5):473e8.
[128] Willcox MDP, Argüeso P, Georgiev GA, Holopainen JM, Laurie GW, Millar TJ,
et al. TFOS DEWS II Tear Film report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:366e403.
[129] Tiffany JM. Tears in health and disease. Eye (Lond) 2003;17(8):923e6.
[130] Stahl U, Willcox M, Stapleton F. Osmolality and tear film dynamics. Clin Exp
Optom 2012;95(1):3e11.
[131] Schotanus MP, Koetje LR, Van Dyken RE, Ubels JL. Stratified corneal limbal
epithelial cells are protected from UVB-induced apoptosis by elevated
extracellular K . Exp Eye Res 2011;93(5):735e40.
[132] Ubels JL, Schotanus MP, Bardolph SL, Haarsma LD, Koetje LR, Louters JR.
Inhibition of UV-B induced apoptosis in corneal epithelial cells by potassium
channel modulators. Exp Eye Res 2010;90(2):216e22.
[133] Green K, MacKeen DL, Slagle T, Cheeks L. Tear potassium contributes to
maintenance of corneal thickness. Ophthalmic Res 1992;24(2):99e102.
[134] Bachman WG, Wilson G. Essential ions for maintenance of the corneal
epithelial surface. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1985;26(11):1484e8.
[135] Smolin G, Foster CS, Azar DT, Dohlman CH. Smolin and Thoft's The Cornea:
Scientific Foundations and Clinical Practice. 4thLippincott Williams & Wil￾kins ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005.
[136] Lopez Bernal D, Ubels JL. Artificial tear composition and promotion of re￾covery of the damaged corneal epithelium. Cornea 1993;12(2):115e20.
[137] Ubels JL, McCartney MD, Lantz WK, Beaird J, Dayalan A, Edelhauser HF. Ef￾fects of preservative-free artificial tear solutions on corneal epithelial
structure and function. Arch Ophthalmol 1995;113(3):371e8.
[138] Craig JP, Tomlinson A. Importance of the lipid layer in human tear film
stability and evaporation. Optom Vis Sci 1997;74(1):8e13.
[139] Lee SY, Tong L. Lipid-containing lubricants for dry eye: a systematic review.
Optom Vis Sci 2012;89(11):1654e61.
[140] Moshirfar M, Pierson K, Hanamaikai K, Santiago-Caban L, Muthappan V,
Passi SF. Artificial tears potpourri: a literature review. Clin Ophthalmol
2014;8:1419e33.
[141] Korb DR, Scaffidi RC, Greiner JV, Kenyon KR, Herman JP, Blackie CA, et al. The
effect of two novel lubricant eye drops on tear film lipid layer thickness in
subjects with dry eye symptoms. Optom Vis Sci 2005;82(7):594e601.
[142] Scaffidi RC, Korb DR. Comparison of the efficacy of two lipid emulsion
eyedrops in increasing tear film lipid layer thickness. Eye Contact Lens
2007;33(1):38e44.
[143] Mason TG, Wilking JN, Meleson K, Chang CB, Graves SM. Nanoemulsions:
formation, structure, and physical properties. J Phys Condens Matter
2006;18:R635.
[144] Royle L, Matthews E, Corfield A, Berry M, Rudd PM, Dwek RA, et al. Glycan
structures of ocular surface mucins in man, rabbit and dog display species
differences. Glycoconj J 2008;25(8):763e73.
[145] Daull P, Lallemand F, Garrigue JS. Benefits of cetalkonium chloride cationic
oil-in-water nanoemulsions for topical ophthalmic drug delivery. J Pharm
Pharmacol 2014;66(4):531e41.
[146] Amrane M, Creuzot-Garcher C, Robert PY, Ismail D, Garrigue JS, Pisella PJ,
et al. Ocular tolerability and efficacy of a cationic emulsion in patients with
mild to moderate dry eye disease - a randomised comparative study. J Fr
Ophtalmol 2014;37(8):589e98.
[147] Zhang W, Wang Y, Lee BT, Liu C, Wei G, Lu W. A novel nanoscale-dispersed
eye ointment for the treatment of dry eye disease. Nanotechnology
2014;25(12):125101.
[148] Lallemand F, Daull P, Benita S, Buggage R, Garrigue JS. Successfully improving
ocular drug delivery using the cationic nanoemulsion, novasorb. J Drug Deliv
2012;2012:604204.
[149] Kinnunen K, Kauppinen A, Piippo N, Koistinen A, Toropainen E,
Kaarniranta K. Cationorm shows good tolerability on human HCE-2 corneal
epithelial cell cultures. Exp Eye Res 2014;120:82e9.
[150] Pinheiro R, Panfil C, Schrage N, Dutescu RM. Comparison of the lubricant
eyedrops Optive®, Vismed Multi®, and Cationorm® on the corneal healing
process in an ex vivo model. Eur J Ophthalmol 2015 Sep-Oct;25(5):379e84.
[151] Yoncheva K, Vandervoort J, Ludwig A. Development of mucoadhesive pol￾y(lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles for ocular application. Pharm Dev
Technol 2011;16(1):29e35.
[152] Paolicelli P, de la Fuente M, Sanchez A, Seijo B, Alonso MJ. Chitosan nano￾particles for drug delivery to the eye. Expert Opin Drug Deliv 2009;6(3):
239e53.
[153] De Campos AM, Sanchez A, Alonso MJ. Chitosan nanoparticles: a new vehicle
for the improvement of the delivery of drugs to the ocular surface. Appli￾cation to cyclosporin A. Int J Pharm 2001;224(1e2):159e68.
[154] Rieger G. Lipid-containing eye drops: a step closer to natural tears. Oph￾thalmologica 1990;201(4):206e12.
[155] Choi JH, Kim JH, Li Z, Oh HJ, Ahn KY, Yoon KC. Efficacy of the mineral oil and
hyaluronic acid mixture eye drops in murine dry eye. Korean J Ophthalmol
2015;29(2):131e7.
[156] Katzer T, Chaves P, Bernardi A, Pohlmann AR, Guterres SS, Beck RC. Castor oil
and mineral oil nanoemulsion: development and compatibility with a soft
contact lens. Pharm Dev Technol 2014;19(2):232e7.
[157] Maïssa C, Guillon M, Simmons P, Vehige J. Effect of castor oil emulsion
eyedrops on tear film composition and stability. Cont Lens Anter Eye
2010;33(2):76e82.
[158] Moscovici BK, Holzchuh R, Chiacchio BB, Santo RM, Shimazaki J, Hida RY.
Clinical treatment of dry eye using 0.03% tacrolimus eye drops. Cornea
2012;31(8):945e9.
[159] Rantamaki AH, Javanainen M, Vattulainen I, Holopainen JM. Do lipids retard €
the evaporation of the tear fluid? Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53(10):
6442e7.
[160] Parrilha LR, Nai GA, Giuffrida R, Barbero RC, Padovani LD, Pereira RH, et al.
Comparison of 1% cyclosporine eye drops in olive oil and in linseed oil to
treat experimentally-induced keratoconjunctivitis sicca in rabbits. Arq Bras
Oftalmol 2015 Sep-Oct;78(5):295e9.
[161] Radomska-Soukharev A, Wojciechowska J. Microemulsions as potential
ocular drug delivery systems: phase diagrams and physical properties
depending on ingredients. Acta Pol Pharm 2005 Nov-Dec;62(6):465e71.
[162] Greiner JV, Glonek T, Korb DR, Booth R, Leahy CD. Phospholipids in meibo￾mian gland secretion. Ophthalmic Res 1996;28(1):44e9.
[163] Dean AW, Glasgow BJ. Mass spectrometric identification of phospholipids in
human tears and tear lipocalin. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53(4):
1773e82.
[164] Ham BM, Cole RB, Jacob JT. Identification and comparison of the polar
phospholipids in normal and dry eye rabbit tears by MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometry. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47(8):3330e8.
[165] Shine WE, McCulley JP. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca associated with meibo￾mian secretion polar lipid abnormality. Arch Ophthalmol 1998;116(7):
849e52.
[166] Chen J, Green-Church KB, Nichols KK. Shotgun lipidomic analysis of human
meibomian gland secretions with electrospray ionization tandem mass
spectrometry. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51(12):6220e31.
[167] Butovich IA, Uchiyama E, Di Pascuale MA, McCulley JP. Liquid chromatog￾raphy-mass spectrometric analysis of lipids present in human meibomian
gland secretions. Lipids 2007;42(8):765e76.
[168] Butovich IA, Wojtowicz JC, Molai M. Human tear film and meibum. Very long
chain wax esters and (O-acyl)-omega-hydroxy fatty acids of meibum. J Lipid
Res 2009;50(12):2471e85.
[169] Ham BM, Jacob JT, Cole RB. MALDI-TOF MS of phosphorylated lipids in bio￾logical fluids using immobilized metal affinity chromatography and a solid
ionic crystal matrix. Anal Chem 2005;77(14):4439e47.
[170] Saville JT, Zhao Z, Willcox MD, Ariyavidana MA, Blanksby SJ, Mitchell TW.
Identification of phospholipids in human meibum by nano-electrospray
ionisation tandem mass spectrometry. Exp Eye Res 2011;92(3):238e40.
[171] Ham BM, Jacob JT, Keese MM, Cole RB. Identification, quantification and
comparison of major non-polar lipids in normal and dry eye tear lipidomes
by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. J Mass Spectrom 2004;39(11):
1321e36.
[172] Pucker AD, Haworth KM. The presence and significance of polar meibum and
tear lipids. Ocul Surf 2015;13(1):26e42.
[173] Korb DR, Greiner JV, Glonek T. The effects of anionic and zwitterionic
phospholipids on the tear film lipid layer. Adv Exp Med Biol 2002;506(Pt A):
495e9.
[174] Korb D, Stone R. Are phospholipids the critical ingredient? Rev Cornea
Contact Lens 2012;149:38e41.
[175] Nicolaides N. Recent findings on the chemical composition of steer and
human meibomian glands. In: Holly F, editor. The Preocular Tear Film in
Health, Disease, and Contact Lens Wear. Lubbock, TX: Dry Eye Institute;
1986. p. 570e6.
[176] McCulley JP, Shine W. A compositional based model for the tear film lipid
layer. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 1997;95:79e88. discussion 88-93 discus￾sion -93.
[177] Wang IJ, Lin IC, Hou YC, Hu FR. A comparison of the effect of carbomer-,
cellulose- and mineral oil-based artificial tear formulations. Eur J Oph￾thalmol 2007 Mar-Apr;17(2):151e9.
[178] Craig JP, Purslow C, Murphy PJ, Wolffsohn JS. Effect of a liposomal spray on
the pre-ocular tear film. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2010;33(2):83e7.
[179] Wang TJ, Wang IJ, Ho JD, Chou HC, Lin SY, Huang MC. Comparison of the
clinical effects of carbomer-based lipid-containing gel and hydroxypropyl￾guar gel artificial tear formulations in patients with dry eye syndrome: a 4-
week, prospective, open-label, randomized, parallel-group, noninferiority
study. Clin Ther 2010;32(1):44e52.
[180] Pult H, Gill F, Riede-Pult BH. Effect of three different liposomal eye sprays on
ocular comfort and tear film. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2012;35. 203-7; quiz
43e4.
[181] Mutalib HA, Kaur S, Ghazali AR, Chinn Hooi N, Safie NH. A pilot study: the
efficacy of virgin coconut oil as ocular rewetting agent on rabbit eyes. Evid
Based Complement Altern Med 2015;2015:135987.
[182] Simmons PA, Carlisle-Wilcox C, Chen R, Liu H, Vehige JG. Efficacy, safety, and
acceptability of a lipid-based artificial tear formulation: a randomized,
controlled, multicenter clinical trial. Clin Ther 2015;37(4):858e68.
[183] Ralph RA, Doane MG, Dohlman CH. Clinical experience with a mobile ocular
perfusion pump. Arch Ophthalmol 1975;93(10):1039e43.
[184] Semeraro F, Forbice E, Braga O, Bova A, Di Salvatore A, Azzolini C. Evaluation
of the efficacy of 50% autologous serum eye drops in different ocular surface
pathologies. Biomed Res Int 2014;2014:826970.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 613
[185] Tsubota K, Goto E, Fujita H, Ono M, Inoue H, Saito I, et al. Treatment of dry
eye by autologous serum application in Sjogren's syndrome. Br J Ophthalmol €
1999;83(4):390e5.
[186] Hwang J, Chung SH, Jeon S, Kwok SK, Park SH, Kim MS. Comparison of
clinical efficacies of autologous serum eye drops in patients with primary
and secondary Sjogren syndrome. Cornea 2014;33(7):663 € e7.
[187] Hondur AM, Akcam HT, Karaca EE, Yazici Eroglu H, Aydin B. Autologous
serum eye drops accelerate epithelial healing after LASEK. Curr Eye Res
2016;41(1):15e9.
[188] Sagara H, Iida T, Saito K, Noji H, Ogasawara M, Oyamada H. Conservative
treatment for late-onset bleb leaks after trabeculectomy with mitomycin C in
patients with ocular surface disease. Clin Ophthalmol 2012;6:1273e9.
[189] Ziakas NG, Boboridis KG, Terzidou C, Naoumidi TL, Mikropoulos D,
Georgiadou EN, et al. Long-term follow up of autologous serum treatment for
recurrent corneal erosions. Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2010;38(7):683e7.
[190] Geerling G, Daniels JT, Dart JK, Cree IA, Khaw PT. Toxicity of natural tear
substitutes in a fully defined culture model of human corneal epithelial cells.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:948e56.
[191] Freire V, Andollo N, Etxebarria J, Hernaez-Moya R, Dur an JA, Morales MC. 
Corneal wound healing promoted by 3 blood derivatives: an in vitro and in
vivo comparative study. Cornea 2014;33(6):614e20.
[192] Akyol-Salman I. Effects of autologous serum eye drops on corneal wound
healing after superficial keratectomy in rabbits. Cornea 2006;25(10):
1178e81.
[193] Hartwig D, Harloff S, Liu L, Schlenke P, Wedel T, Geerling G. Epitheliotrophic
capacity of a growth factor preparation produced from platelet concentrates
on corneal epithelial cells: a potential agent for the treatment of ocular
surface defects? Transfusion 2004;44(12):1724e31.
[194] Hartwig D, Herminghaus P, Wedel T, Liu L, Schlenke P, Dibbelt L, et al. Topical
treatment of ocular surface defects: comparison of the epitheliotrophic ca￾pacity of fresh frozen plasma and serum on corneal epithelial cells in an in
vitro cell culture model. Transfus Med 2005;15(2):107e13.
[195] Esquenazi S, He J, Bazan HE, Bazan NG. Use of autologous serum in corneal
epithelial defects post-lamellar surgery. Cornea 2005;24(8):992e7.
[196] Lopez-García JS, García-Lozano I, Rivas L, Gim enez C, Acera A, Su arez- 
Cortes T. Effects of autologous serum eye drops on conjunctival expression of 
MUC5AC in patients with ocular surface disorders. Cornea 2016;35(3):
336e41.
[197] Watson SL, Secker GA, Daniels JT. The effect of therapeutic human serum
drops on corneal stromal wound-healing activity. Curr Eye Res 2008;33(8):
641e52.
[198] Harloff S, Hartwig D, Kasper K, Wedel T, Muller M, Geerling G. Epithelio￾trophic capacity of serum eye drops from healthy donors versus serum from
immunosuppressed patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Klin Monbl Augen￾heilkd 2008;225:200e6.
[199] Maclennan S, Hartwig D, Geerling G. Experiences with a centralised national
service for autologous serum eyedrops in England. Ophthalmologe
2008;105:639e43.
[200] Geerling G, Maclennan S, Hartwig D. Autologous serum eye drops for ocular
surface disorders. Br J Ophthalmol 2004;88(11):1467e74.
[201] Geerling G, Grus F, Seitz B, Hartwig D, Schirra F. Legal regulations to produce
serum eye drops : when is it necessary, and how can it be obtained? Oph￾thalmologe 2008;105:632e8.
[202] Dietrich T, Weisbach V, Seitz B, Jacobi C, Kruse FE, Eckstein R, et al. Manu￾facture of autologous serum eye drops for out-patient therapy : cooperation
between ophthalmic clinic and transfusion medicine department. Oph￾thalmologe 2008;105:1036e8. 40-2.
[203] Herminghaus P, Geerling G, Hartwig D, Wedel T, Dibbelt L. Epitheliotrophic
capacity of serum and plasma eyedrops. Influence of centrifugation. Oph￾thalmologe 2004;101:998e1005.
[204] Liu L, Hartwig D, Harloff S, Herminghaus P, Wedel T, Geerling G. An opti￾mised protocol for the production of autologous serum eyedrops. Graefes
Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2005;243(7):706e14.
[205] Partal A, Scott E. Low-cost protocol for the production of autologous serum
eye drops by blood collection and processing centres for the treatment of
ocular surface diseases. Transfus Med 2011;21(4):271e7.
[206] Bradley JC, Simoni J, Bradley RH, McCartney DL, Brown SM. Time- and
temperature-dependent stability of growth factor peptides in human
autologous serum eye drops. Cornea 2009;28(2):200e5.
[207] Fischer KR, Opitz A, Boeck M, Geerling G. Stability of serum eye drops after €
storage of 6 months. Cornea 2012;31(11):1313e8.
[208] Lopez-García JS, García-Lozano I, Rivas L, Ramírez N, M endez MT, Raposo R. 
Stability of growth factors in autologous serum eyedrops after long-term
storage. Curr Eye Res 2016;41(3):292e8.
[209] Spaniol K, Koerschgen L, Sander O, Koegler G, Geerling G. Comparison of
application systems for autologous serum eye drops. Curr Eye Res
2014;39(6):571e9.
[210] Kasper K, Godenschweger L, Hartwig D, Unterlauft JD, Seitz B, Geerling G. On
the use of autologous serum eyedrops in Germany : results of a survey
among members of the Cornea Section of the German Ophthalmological
Society (DOG). Ophthalmologe 2008;105:644e9.
[211] Dalmon CA, Chandra NS, Jeng BH. Use of autologous serum eyedrops for the
treatment of ocular surface disease: first US experience in a large population
as an insurance-covered benefit. Arch Ophthalmol 2012;130:1612e3.
[212] Mondy P, Brama T, Fisher J, Gemelli CN, Chee K, Keegan A, et al. Sustained
benefits of autologous serum eye drops on self-reported ocular symptoms
and vision-related quality of life in Australian patients with dry eye and
corneal epithelial defects. Transfus Apher Sci 2015;53(3):404e11.
[213] Noble BA, Loh RS, MacLennan S, Pesudovs K, Reynolds A, Bridges LR, et al.
Comparison of autologous serum eye drops with conventional therapy in a
randomised controlled crossover trial for ocular surface disease. Br J Oph￾thalmol 2004;88:647e52.
[214] Kojima T, Ishida R, Dogru M, Goto E, Matsumoto Y, Kaido M, et al. The effect
of autologous serum eyedrops in the treatment of severe dry eye disease: a
prospective randomized case-control study. Am J Ophthalmol 2005;139(2):
242e6.
[215] Noda-Tsuruya T, Asano-Kato N, Toda I, Tsubota K. Autologous serum eye
drops for dry eye after LASIK. J Refract Surg 2006 Jan-Feb;22(1):61e6.
[216] Yoon KC, Heo H, Im SK, You IC, Kim YH, Park YG. Comparison of autologous
serum and umbilical cord serum eye drops for dry eye syndrome. Am J
Ophthalmol 2007;144(1):86e92.
[217] Urzua CA, Vasquez DH, Huidobro A, Hernandez H, Alfaro J. Randomized
double-blind clinical trial of autologous serum versus artificial tears in dry
eye syndrome. Curr Eye Res 2012;37(8):684e8.
[218] Celebi AR, Ulusoy C, Mirza GE. The efficacy of autologous serum eye drops for
severe dry eye syndrome: a randomized double-blind crossover study.
Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2014;252(4):619e26.
[219] Hussain M, Shtein RM, Sugar A, Soong HK, Woodward MA, DeLoss K, et al.
Long-term use of autologous serum 50% eye drops for the treatment of dry
eye disease. Cornea 2014;33(12):1245e51.
[220] Jirsova K, Brejchova K, Krabcova I, Filipec M, Al Fakih A, Palos M, et al. The
application of autologous serum eye drops in severe dry eye patients; sub￾jective and objective parameters before and after treatment. Curr Eye Res
2014;39(1):21e30.
[221] Lopez-García JS, García-Lozano I, Rivas L, Ramírez N, Raposo R, M endez MT. 
Autologous serum eye drops diluted with sodium hyaluronate: clinical and
experimental comparative study. Acta Ophthalmol 2014;92(1):e22e9.
[222] Aggarwal S, Kheirkhah A, Cavalcanti BM, Cruzat A, Colon C, Brown E, et al.
Autologous serum tears for treatment of photoallodynia in patients with
corneal neuropathy: efficacy and evaluation with in vivo confocal micro￾scopy. Ocul Surf 2015;13(3):250e62.
[223] Li J, Zhang X, Zheng Q, Zhu Y, Wang H, Ma H, et al. Comparative evaluation of
silicone hydrogel contact lenses and autologous serum for management of
sjogren syndrome-associated dry eye. Cornea 2015;34(9):1072 € e8.
[224] Mukhopadhyay S, Sen S, Datta H. Comparative role of 20% cord blood serum
and 20% autologous serum in dry eye associated with Hansen's disease: a
tear proteomic study. Br J Ophthalmol 2015;99(1):108e12.
[225] Turkoglu Elif, Celik Erkan, Alagoz Gursoy. A comparison of the efficacy of
autologous serum eye drops with amniotic membrane transplantation in
neurotrophic keratitis. Semin Ophthalmol 2014;29(3):119e26.
[226] Leite SC, de Castro RS, Alves M, Cunha DA, Correa ME, da Silveira LA, et al.
Risk factors and characteristics of ocular complications, and efficacy of
autologous serum tears after haematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation.
Bone Marrow Transpl 2006;38(3):223e7.
[227] Thanathanee O, Phanphruk W, Anutarapongpan O, Romphruk A, Suwan￾Apichon O. Contamination risk of 100% autologous serum eye drops in
management of ocular surface diseases. Cornea 2013;32(8):1116e9.
[228] Sanz-Marco E, Lopez-Prats MJ, Garcia-Delpech S, Udaondo P, Diaz-Llopis M.
Fulminant bilateral Haemophilus influenzae keratitis in a patient with
hypovitaminosis A treated with contaminated autologous serum. Clin Oph￾thalmol 2011;5:71e3.
[229] Petznick A, Tong L, Chung R, Wang JC, Koh M, Salleh R, et al. Autologous
plasma eyedrops prepared in a closed system: a treatment for dry eye. Eye
(Lond) 2013;27(9):1102.
[230] Chiang CC, Lin JM, Chen WL, Tsai YY. Allogeneic serum eye drops for the
treatment of severe dry eye in patients with chronic graft-versus-host dis￾ease. Cornea 2007;26(7):861e3.
[231] Na KS, Kim MS. Allogeneic serum eye drops for the treatment of dry eye
patients with chronic graft-versus-host disease. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther
2012;28(5):479e83.
[232] Harritshøj LH, Nielsen C, Ullum H, Hansen MB, Julian HO. Ready-made
allogeneic ABO-specific serum eye drops: production from regular male
blood donors, clinical routine, safety and efficacy. Acta Ophthalmol
2014;92(8):783e6.
[233] Badami KG, McKellar M. Allogeneic serum eye drops: time these became the
norm? Br J Ophthalmol 2012;96(8):1151e2.
[234] Yoon KC. Use of umbilical cord serum in ophthalmology. Chonnam Med J
2014;50(3):82e5.
[235] Yoon KC, Im SK, Park YG, Jung YD, Yang SY, Choi J. Application of umbilical
cord serum eyedrops for the treatment of dry eye syndrome. Cornea
2006;25(3):268e72.
[236] Yoon KC, Jeong IY, Im SK, Park YG, Kim HJ, Choi J. Therapeutic effect of
umbilical cord serum eyedrops for the treatment of dry eye associated with
graft-versus-host disease. Bone Marrow Transpl 2007;39(4):231e5.
[237] Liu L, Hartwig D, Harloff S, Herminghaus P, Wedel T, Kasper K, et al. Corneal
epitheliotrophic capacity of three different blood-derived preparations.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47(6):2438e44.
[238] Zallio F, Mazzucco L, Monaco F, Astori MR, Passera R, Drago G, et al. A single￾center pilot prospective study of topical application of platelet-derived eye
drops for patients with ocular chronic graft-versus-host disease. Biol Blood
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 614
Marrow Transpl 2016;22(9):1664e70.
[239] Fea AM, Aragno V, Testa V, Machetta F, Parisi S, D'Antico S, et al. The effect of
autologous platelet lysate eye drops: an in vivo confocal microscopy study.
Biomed Res Int 2016;2016:8406832.
[240] Riestra AC, Alonso-Herreros JM, Merayo-Lloves J. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol
2016;91(10):475e90.
[241] Anitua E, Muruzabal F, de la Fuente M, Riestra A, Merayo-Lloves J, Orive G.
PRGF exerts more potent proliferative and anti-inflammatory effects than
autologous serum on a cell culture inflammatory model. Exp Eye Res
2016;151:115e21.
[242] Alio JL, Colecha JR, Pastor S, Rodriguez A, Artola A. Symptomatic dry eye
treatment with autologous platelet-rich plasma. Ophthalmic Res 2007;39(3):
124e9.
[243] Lopez-Plandolit S, Morales MC, Freire V, Grau AE, Dur an JA. Efficacy of
plasma rich in growth factors for the treatment of dry eye. Cornea
2011;30(12):1312e7.
[244] Pezzotta S, Del Fante C, Scudeller L, Cervio M, Antoniazzi ER, Perotti C.
Autologous platelet lysate for treatment of refractory ocular GVHD. Bone
Marrow Transpl 2012;47(12):1558e63.
[245] Ichikawa Y, Tokunaga M, Shimizu H, Moriuchi J, Takaya M, Arimori S. Clinical
trial of ambroxol (Mucosolvan) in Sjogren's syndrome. Tokai J Exp Clin Med €
1988;13(3):165e9.
[246] Kerksick C, Willoughby D. The antioxidant role of glutathione and N-acetyl￾cysteine supplements and exercise-induced oxidative stress. J Int Soc Sports
Nutr 2005;2:38e44.
[247] Pokupec R, Petricek I, Sikic J, Bradic M, Popovic-Suic S, Petricek G. Compar￾ison of local acetylcysteine and artificial tears in the management of dry eye
syndrome. Acta Med Croat 2005;59:337e40.
[248] Albietz J, Sanfilippo P, Troutbeck R, Lenton LM. Management of filamentary
keratitis associated with aqueous-deficient dry eye. Optom Vis Sci
2003;80(6):420e30.
[249] Pan Z, Wang Z, Yang H, Zhang F, Reinach PS. TRPV1 activation is required for
hypertonicity-stimulated inflammatory cytokine release in human corneal
epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(1):485e93.
[250] Mergler S, Garreis F, Sahlmüller M, Lyras EM, Reinach PS, Dwarakanath A,
et al. Calcium regulation by thermo- and osmosensing transient receptor
potential vanilloid channels (TRPVs) in human conjunctival epithelial cells.
Histochem Cell Biol 2012;137(6):743e61.
[251] Benitez-Del-Castillo JM, Moreno-Montanes J, Jimenez-Alfaro I, Munoz￾Negrete FJ, Turman K, Palumaa K, et al. Safety and efficacy clinical trials for
SYL1001, a novel short interfering RNA for the treatment of dry eye disease.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2016;57:6447e54.
[252] Kaido M, Ishida R, Dogru M, Tsubota K. Visual function changes after punctal
occlusion with the treatment of short BUT type of dry eye. Cornea
2012;31(9):1009e13.
[253] Chen F, Wang J, Chen W, Shen M, Xu S, Lu F. Upper punctal occlusion versus
lower punctal occlusion in dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51(11):
5571e7.
[254] Li M, Wang J, Shen M, Cui L, Tao A, Chen Z, et al. Effect of punctal occlusion on
tear menisci in symptomatic contact lens wearers. Cornea 2012;31(9):
1014e22.
[255] Geldis JR, Nichols JJ. The impact of punctal occlusion on soft contact lens
wearing comfort and the tear film. Eye Contact Lens 2008;34(5):261e5.
[256] Alfawaz AM, Algehedan S, Jastaneiah SS, Al-Mansouri S, Mousa A, Al-Assiri A.
Efficacy of punctal occlusion in management of dry eyes after laser in situ
keratomileusis for myopia. Curr Eye Res 2014;39(3):257e62.
[257] Yung YH, Toda I, Sakai C, Yoshida A, Tsubota K. Punctal plugs for treatment of
post-LASIK dry eye. Jpn J Ophthalmol 2012;56(3):208e13.
[258] Ambrosio Jr R, Tervo T, Wilson SE. LASIK-associated dry eye and neuro- 
trophic epitheliopathy: pathophysiology and strategies for prevention and
treatment. J Refract Surg 2008;24(4):396e407.
[259] Yaguchi S, Ogawa Y, Kamoi M, Uchino M, Tatematsu Y, Ban Y, et al. Surgical
management of lacrimal punctal cauterization in chronic GVHD-related dry
eye with recurrent punctal plug extrusion. Bone Marrow Transpl
2012;47(11):1465e9.
[260] Sabti S, Halter JP, Braun Fr€
ankl BC, Goldblum D. Punctal occlusion is safe and
efficient for the treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in patients with
ocular GvHD. Bone Marrow Transpl 2012;47(7):981e4.
[261] Yang HY, Fujishima H, Toda I, Shimazaki J, Tsubota K. Lacrimal punctal oc￾clusion for the treatment of superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis. Am J
Ophthalmol 1997;124(1):80e7.
[262] Tai MC, Cosar CB, Cohen EJ, Rapuano CJ, Laibson PR. The clinical efficacy of
silicone punctal plug therapy. Cornea 2002;21(2):135e9.
[263] Tong L, Beuerman R, Simonyi S, Hollander DA, Stern ME. Effects of punctal
occlusion on clinical signs and symptoms and on tear cytokine levels in
patients with dry eye. Ocul Surf 2016;14(2):233e41.
[264] Goto E, Yagi Y, Kaido M, Matsumoto Y, Konomi K, Tsubota K. Improved
functional visual acuity after punctal occlusion in dry eye patients. Am J
Ophthalmol 2003;135(5):704e5.
[265] Kimura K, Yokoi N, Inagaki K, Komuro A, Sonomura Y, Kato H, et al. Treat￾ment progress of large-size puncta and clinical investigation of the extrusion
rate and other complications associated with large-size punctal plugs. Nip￾pon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi 2014;118:490e4.
[266] Schaumberg DA, Uchino M, Christen WG, Semba RD, Buring JE, Li JZ. Patient
reported differences in dry eye disease between men and women: impact,
management, and patient satisfaction. PLoS One 2013;8:e76121.
[267] Yokoi N, Komuro A. Non-invasive methods of assessing the tear film. Exp Eye
Res 2004;78(3):399e407.
[268] Chen F, Shen M, Chen W, Wang J, Li M, Yuan Y, et al. Tear meniscus volume in
dry eye after punctal occlusion. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51(4):
1965e9.
[269] Foulks GN, Forstot SL, Donshik PC, Forstot JZ, Goldstein MH, Lemp MA, et al.
Clinical guidelines for management of dry eye associated with Sjogren dis- €
ease. Ocul Surf 2015;13(2):118e32.
[270] Hirai K, Takano Y, Uchio E, Kadonosono K. Clinical evaluation of the thera￾peutic effects of atelocollagen absorbable punctal plugs. Clin Ophthalmol
2012;6:133e8.
[271] Hamano T. Atelocollagen punctal occlusion for the treatment of the dry eye.
Adv Exp Med Biol 2002;506(Pt B):1283e4.
[272] Miyata K, Otani S, Miyai T, Nejima R, Amano S. Atelocollagen punctal oc￾clusion in dry eye patients. Cornea 2006;25(1):47e50.
[273] Hadassah J, Bhuvaneshwari N, Singh D, Sehgal PK. Preparation and clinical
evaluation of succinylated collagen punctal plugs in dry eye syndrome: a
pilot study. Ophthalmic Res 2010;43(4):185e92.
[274] Capita L, Chalita MR, dos Santos-Neto LL. Prospective evaluation of hypro￾mellose 2% for punctal occlusion in patients with dry eye. Cornea
2015;34(2):188e92.
[275] Mazow ML, McCall T, Prager TC. Lodged intracanalicular plugs as a cause of
lacrimal obstruction. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 2007 Mar-Apr;23(2):
138e42.
[276] ClinicalTrialsWebsite. Tolerability, Safety and Efficacy of Lubricin (150 mg/ml)
Eye Drops Versus Sodium Hyaluronate (HA) 0.18% Eye Drops in Patients
With Moderate Dry Eye (DE). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02507934?term¼lubricin&rank¼22015.
[277] Egrilmez S, Aslan F, Karabulut G, Kabasakal Y, Yagci A. Clinical efficacy of the
SmartPlug™ in the treatment of primary Sjogren's syndrome with kerato￾conjunctivitis sicca: one-year follow-up study. Rheumatol Int 2011;31(12):
1567e70.
[278] SmartPlug Study G. Management of complications after insertion of the
SmartPlug punctal plug: a study of 28 patients. Ophthalmology
2006;113(1859):e1e6.
[279] Rabensteiner DF, Boldin I, Klein A, Horwath-Winter J. Collared silicone
punctal plugs compared to intracanalicular plugs for the treatment of dry
eye. Curr Eye Res 2013;38(5):521e5.
[280] Joganathan V, Mehta P, Murray A, Durrani OM. Complications of intra￾canalicular plugs: a case series. Orbit 2010;29(5):271e3.
[281] Murube J, Murube E. Treatment of dry eye by blocking the lacrimal canaliculi.
Surv Ophthalmol 1996 May-Jun;40(6):463e80.
[282] Patten JT. Punctal occlusion with n-butyl cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive.
Ophthalmic Surg 1976;7(2):24e6.
[283] Balaram M, Schaumberg DA, Dana MR. Efficacy and tolerability outcomes
after punctal occlusion with silicone plugs in dry eye syndrome. Am J
Ophthalmol 2001;131(1):30e6.
[284] Nishii M, Yokoi N, Komuro A, Kinoshita S. Clinical investigation of extrusion
of a new punctal plug(Flex Plug). Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi 2004;108:
139e43.
[285] Nishii M, Yokoi N, Komuro A, Sugita J, Nakamura Y, Kojima K, et al. Com￾parison of extrusion rate for two different design of punctal plugs. Nippon
Ganka Gakkai Zasshi 2003;107:322e5.
[286] Sonomura Y, Yokoi N, Komuro A, Inagaki K, Kinoshita S. Clinical investigation
of the extrusion rate and other complications of the SuperEagle plug. Nippon
Ganka Gakkai Zasshi 2013;117:126e31.
[287] Horwath-Winter J, Thaci A, Gruber A, Boldin I. Long-term retention rates and
complications of silicone punctal plugs in dry eye. Am J Ophthalmol
2007;144(3):441e4.
[288] Kaido M, Ishida R, Dogru M, Tsubota K. Comparison of retention rates and
complications of 2 different types of silicon lacrimal punctal plugs in the
treatment of dry eye disease. Am J Ophthalmol 2013;155:648e53. 53 e1.
[289] Sakamoto A, Kitagawa K, Tatami A. Efficacy and retention rate of two types of
silicone punctal plugs in patients with and without Sjogren syndrome. €
Cornea 2004;23(3):249e54.
[290] Rumelt S, Remulla H, Rubin PA. Silicone punctal plug migration resulting in
dacryocystitis and canaliculitis. Cornea 1997;16(3):377e9.
[291] Scheepers M, Pearson A, Michaelides M. Bilateral canaliculitis following
SmartPLUG insertion for dry eye syndrome post LASIK surgery. Graefes Arch
Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2007;245(6):895e7.
[292] Yokoi N, Okada K, Sugita J, Kinoshita S. Acute conjunctivitis associated with
biofilm formation on a punctal plug. Jpn J Ophthalmol 2000 Sep-Oct;44(5):
559e60.
[293] Ahn HB, Seo JW, Roh MS, Jeong WJ, Park WC, Rho SH. Canaliculitis with a
papilloma-like mass caused by a temporary punctal plug. Ophthal Plast
Reconstr Surg 2009 Sep-Oct;25(5):413e4.
[294] Bourkiza R, Lee V. A review of the complications of lacrimal occlusion with
punctal and canalicular plugs. Orbit 2012;31(2):86e93.
[295] Dohlman CH. Punctal occlusion in keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Ophthalmology
1978;85(12):1277e81.
[296] Geerling G, Tost FH. Surgical occlusion of the lacrimal drainage system. Dev
Ophthalmol 2008;41:213e29.
[297] Ohba E, Dogru M, Hosaka E, Yamazaki A, Asaga R, Tatematsu Y, et al. Surgical
punctal occlusion with a high heat-energy releasing cautery device for
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 615
severe dry eye with recurrent punctal plug extrusion. Am J Ophthalmol
2011;151(3):483e7. e1.
[298] Holzchuh R, Villa Albers MB, Osaki TH, Igami TZ, Santo RM, Kara-Jose N, et al.
Two-year outcome of partial lacrimal punctal occlusion in the management
of dry eye related to Sjogren syndrome. Curr Eye Res 2011;36(6):507 € e12.
[299] Yazici B, Bilge AD, Naqadan F. Lacrimal Punctal Occlusion With Conjunctival
Flap. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 2015 Jul-Aug;31(4):300e2.
[300] Panagopoulos A, Chalioulias K, Ramsay AS. 'Punctal switch' grafting for the
treatment of dry eyes: our experience. Ophthalmic Res 2011;46(4):218e20.
[301] Obata H, Ibaraki N, Tsuru T. A technique for preventing spontaneous loss of
lacrimal punctal plugs. Am J Ophthalmol 2006;141(3):567e9.
[302] Putterman AM. Canaliculectomy in the treatment of keratitis sicca.
Ophthalmic Surg 1991;22(8):478e80.
[303] DeMartelaere SL, Blaydon SM, Tovilla-Canales JL, Shore JW. A permanent and
reversible procedure to block tear drainage for the treatment of dry eye.
Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 2006 Sep-Oct;22(5):352e5.
[304] Kaido M, Goto E, Dogru M, Tsubota K. Punctal occlusion in the management
of chronic Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Ophthalmology 2004;111(5):
895e900.
[305] Knapp ME, Frueh BR, Nelson CC, Musch DC. A comparison of two methods of
punctal occlusion. Am J Ophthalmol 1989;108(3):315e8.
[306] Roberts CW, Carniglia PE, Brazzo BG. Comparison of topical cyclosporine,
punctal occlusion, and a combination for the treatment of dry eye. Cornea
2007;26(7):805e9.
[307] Ervin AM, Wojciechowski R, Schein O. Punctal occlusion for dry eye syn￾drome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;(9):CD006775.
[308] Kojima K, Yokoi N, Nakamura Y, Takada Y, Sato H, Komuro A, et al. Outcome
of punctal plug occlusion therapy for severe dry eye syndrome. Nippon
Ganka Gakkai Zasshi 2002;106:360e4.
[309] Nava-Castaneda A, Tovilla-Canales JL, Rodriguez L, Tovilla Y Pomar JL,
Jones CE. Effects of lacrimal occlusion with collagen and silicone plugs on
patients with conjunctivitis associated with dry eye. Cornea 2003;22(1):
10e4.
[310] Farrell J, Patel S, Grierson DG, Sturrock RD. A clinical procedure to predict the
value of temporary occlusion therapy in keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 2003;23(1):1e8.
[311] Altan-Yaycioglu R, Gencoglu EA, Akova YA, Dursun D, Cengiz F, Akman A.
Silicone versus collagen plugs for treating dry eye: results of a prospective
randomized trial including lacrimal scintigraphy. Am J Ophthalmol
2005;140(1):88e93.
[312] Chen SX, Lee GA. SmartPlug in the management of severe dry eye syndrome.
Cornea 2007;26(5):534e8.
[313] Shi S, Chen W, Zhang X, Ma HX, Sun L. Effects of silicone punctal plugs for
tear deficiency dry eye patients. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi 2013;49:151e4.
[314] Savar DE. A new approach to ocular moisture chambers. J Pediatr Oph￾thalmol Strabismus 1978 Jan-Feb;15(1):51e3.
[315] Gresset J, Simonet P, Gordon D. Combination of a side shield with an ocular
moisture chamber. Am J Optom Physiol Opt 1984;61(9):610e2.
[316] Shen G, Qi Q, Ma X. Effect of Moisture Chamber Spectacles on Tear Functions
in Dry Eye Disease. Optom Vis Sci 2016;93(2):158e64.
[317] Craig J, Chan E, Ea L, Kam C, Lu Y, Misra S. Dry eye relief for VDU users from a
USB-desktop humidifier. Contact Lens Anter Eye 2012;35:28. e-abstract.
[318] Shigeyasu C, Hirano S, Akune Y, Yamada M. Diquafosol Tetrasodium In￾creases the Concentration of Mucin-like Substances in Tears of Healthy
Human Subjects. Curr Eye Res 2015;40(9):878e83.
[319] Fujihara T, Murakami T, Nagano T, Nakamura M, Nakata K. INS365 sup￾presses loss of corneal epithelial integrity by secretion of mucin-like glyco￾protein in a rabbit short-term dry eye model. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther
2002;18(4):363e70.
[320] Lau OC, Samarawickrama C, Skalicky SE. P2Y2 receptor agonists for the
treatment of dry eye disease: a review. Clin Ophthalmol 2014;8:327e34.
[321] Gong L, Sun X, Ma Z, Wang Q, Xu X, Chen X, et al. A randomised, parallel￾group comparison study of diquafosol ophthalmic solution in patients with
dry eye in China and Singapore. Br J Ophthalmol 2015;99(7):903e8.
[322] Bremond-Gignac D, Gicquel JJ, Chiambaretta F. Pharmacokinetic evaluation
of diquafosol tetrasodium for the treatment of Sjogren's syndrome. Expert €
Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2014;10(6):905e13.
[323] Koh S, Ikeda C, Takai Y, Watanabe H, Maeda N, Nishida K. Long-term results
of treatment with diquafosol ophthalmic solution for aqueous-deficient dry
eye. Jpn J Ophthalmol 2013;57(5):440e6.
[324] Shimazaki-Den S, Iseda H, Dogru M, Shimazaki J. Effects of diquafosol sodium
eye drops on tear film stability in short BUT type of dry eye. Cornea
2013;32(8):1120e5.
[325] Yamaguchi M, Nishijima T, Shimazaki J, Takamura E, Yokoi N, Watanabe H,
et al. Real-world assessment of diquafosol in dry eye patients with risk
factors such as contact lens, meibomian gland dysfunction, and con￾junctivochalasis: subgroup analysis from a prospective observational study.
Clin Ophthalmol 2015;9:2251e6.
[326] Mori Y, Nejima R, Masuda A, Maruyama Y, Minami K, Miyata K, et al. Effect of
diquafosol tetrasodium eye drop for persistent dry eye after laser in situ
keratomileusis. Cornea 2014;33(7):659e62.
[327] Park DH, Chung JK, Seo du R, Lee SJ. Clinical Effects and Safety of 3%
Diquafosol Ophthalmic Solution for Patients With Dry Eye After Cataract
Surgery: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Am J Ophthalmol 2016;163:
122e31. e2.
[328] Byun YS, Yoo YS, Kwon JY, Joo JS, Lim SA, Whang WJ, et al. Diquafosol pro￾motes corneal epithelial healing via intracellular calcium-mediated ERK
activation. Exp Eye Res 2016;143:89e97.
[329] Chao W, Belmonte C, Benitez Del Castillo JM, Bron AJ, Dua HS, Nichols KK,
et al. Report of the Inaugural Meeting of the TFOS i(2) ¼ initiating innovation
Series: Targeting the Unmet Need for Dry Eye Treatment. Ocul Surf
2016;14(2):264e316.
[330] Samudre S, Lattanzio Jr FA, Lossen V, Hosseini A, Sheppard Jr JD, McKown RL,
et al. Lacritin, a novel human tear glycoprotein, promotes sustained basal
tearing and is well tolerated. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(9):6265e70.
[331] Vijmasi T, Chen FY, Balasubbu S, Gallup M, McKown RL, Laurie GW, et al.
Topical administration of lacritin is a novel therapy for aqueous-deficient dry
eye disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55(8):5401e9.
[332] Itoh S, Itoh K, Shinohara H. Regulation of human corneal epithelial mucins by
rebamipide. Curr Eye Res 2014;39(2):133e41.
[333] Kinoshita S, Awamura S, Nakamichi N, Suzuki H, Oshiden K, Yokoi N, et al. A
multicenter, open-label, 52-week study of 2% rebamipide (OPC-12759)
ophthalmic suspension in patients with dry eye. Am J Ophthalmol
2014;157(3):576e83. e1.
[334] Koh S, Inoue Y, Sugmimoto T, Maeda N, Nishida K. Effect of rebamipide
ophthalmic suspension on optical quality in the short break-up time type of
dry eye. Cornea 2013;32(9):1219e23.
[335] Itakura H, Kashima T, Itakura M, Akiyama H, Kishi S. Topical rebamipide
improves lid wiper epitheliopathy. Clin Ophthalmol 2013;7:2137e41.
[336] Sasaki H, Kokubun T. Alkali burn treated with 2% rebamipide ophthalmic
suspension: a case report. Case Rep Ophthalmol 2014 Sep-Dec;5(3):380e5.
[337] Kashima T, Itakura H, Akiyama H, Kishi S. Rebamipide ophthalmic suspen￾sion for the treatment of dry eye syndrome: a critical appraisal. Clin Oph￾thalmol 2014;8:1003e10.
[338] Igarashi A, Kamiya K, Kobashi H, Shimizu K. Effect of Rebamipide Ophthalmic
Suspension on Intraocular Light Scattering for Dry Eye After Corneal
Refractive Surgery. Cornea 2015;34(8):895e900.
[339] Uchino Y, Mauris J, Woodward AM, Dieckow J, Amparo F, Dana R, et al.
Alteration of galectin-3 in tears of patients with dry eye disease. Am J
Ophthalmol 2015;159(6):1027e35. e3.
[340] Nakamura T, Hata Y, Nagata M, Yokoi N, Yamaguchi S, Kaku T, et al. JBP485
promotes tear and mucin secretion in ocular surface epithelia. Sci Rep
2015;5:10248.
[341] He H, Ding H, Liao A, Liu Q, Yang J, Zhong X. Effects of mycophenolate mofetil
on proliferation and mucin-5AC expression in human conjunctival goblet
cells in vitro. Mol Vis 2010;16:1913e9.
[342] Yang YM, Park S, Ji H, Kim TI, Kim EK, Kang KK, et al. DA-6034 Induces
[Ca(2þ)]i Increase in Epithelial Cells. Korean J Physiol Pharmacol 2014;18:
89e94.
[343] Choi SM, Seo MJ, Lee YG, Lee MJ, Jeon HJ, Kang KK, et al. Effects of DA-6034, a
flavonoid derivative, on mucin-like glycoprotein and ocular surface integrity
in a rabbit model. Arzneimittelforschung 2009;59(10):498e503.
[344] Schulze U, Sel S, Paulsen FP. Trefoil factor family peptide 3 at the ocular
surface. A promising therapeutic candidate for patients with dry eye syn￾drome? Dev Ophthalmol 2010;45:1e11.
[345] Schulze U, Hampel U, Sel S, Contreras-Ruiz L, Schicht M, Dieckow J, et al.
Trefoil factor family peptide 3 (TFF3) is upregulated under experimental
conditions similar to dry eye disease and supports corneal wound healing
effects in vitro. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55(5):3037e42.
[346] Lambiase A, Micera A, Pellegrini G, Merlo D, Rama P, De Luca M, et al. In vitro
evidence of nerve growth factor effects on human conjunctival epithelial cell
differentiation and mucin gene expression. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2009;50(10):4622e30.
[347] Ding J, Sullivan DA. The effects of insulin-like growth factor 1 and growth
hormone on human meibomian gland epithelial cells. JAMA Ophthalmol
2014;132(5):593e9.
[348] Schirra F, Suzuki T, Richards SM, Jensen RV, Liu M, Lombardi MJ, et al.
Androgen control of gene expression in the mouse meibomian gland. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46(10):3666e75.
[349] Schirra F, Richards SM, Liu M, Suzuki T, Yamagami H, Sullivan DA. Androgen
regulation of lipogenic pathways in the mouse meibomian gland. Exp Eye
Res 2006;83(2):291e6.
[350] Sullivan DA, Jensen RV, Suzuki T, Richards SM. Do sex steroids exert sex￾specific and/or opposite effects on gene expression in lacrimal and meibo￾mian glands? Mol Vis 2009;15:1553e72.
[351] Khandelwal P, Liu S, Sullivan DA. Androgen regulation of gene expression in
human meibomian gland and conjunctival epithelial cells. Mol Vis 2012;18:
1055e67.
[352] Schiffman R, Bradford R, Bunnell B, Lai F, Bernstein P, Whitcup S. A multi￾center, double-masked, randomized, vehicle-controlled, parallel group study
to evaluate the safety and efficacy of testosterone ophthalmic solution in
patients with meibomian gland dysfunction. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2006;47. ARVO e-abstract #5608.
[353] Sullivan DA, Rocha EM, Aragona P, Clayton JA, Ding J, Golebiowski B, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Sex, Gender, and Hormones report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:
284e333.
[354] Tsifetaki N, Kitsos G, Paschides CA, Alamanos Y, Eftaxias V, Voulgari PV, et al.
Oral pilocarpine for the treatment of ocular symptoms in patients with
Sjogren's syndrome: a randomised 12 week controlled study. Ann Rheum €
Dis 2003;62(12):1204e7.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 616
[355] Kawakita T, Shimmura S, Tsubota K. Effect of Oral Pilocarpine in Treating
Severe Dry Eye in Patients With Sjogren Syndrome. Asia Pac J Ophthalmol €
Phila 2015 Mar-Apr;4(2):101e5.
[356] Aragona P, Di Pietro R, Spinella R, Mobrici M. Conjunctival epithelium
improvement after systemic pilocarpine in patients with Sjogren's syn￾drome. Br J Ophthalmol 2006;90(2):166e70.
[357] Ibrahim OM, Dogru M, Kawashima S, Wakamatsu TH, Tsubota K,
Fujishima H. Visante optical coherence tomography and tear function test
evaluation of cholinergic treatment response in patients with sjogren syn- €
drome. Cornea 2013;32(5):653e7.
[358] Noaiseh G, Baker JF, Vivino FB. Comparison of the discontinuation rates and
side-effect profiles of pilocarpine and cevimeline for xerostomia in primary
Sjogren's syndrome. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2014 Jul-Aug;32(4):575 € e7.
[359] Petrone D, Condemi JJ, Fife R, Gluck O, Cohen S, Dalgin P. A double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled study of cevimeline in Sjogren's syndrome €
patients with xerostomia and keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Arthritis Rheum
2002;46(3):748e54.
[360] Ono M, Takamura E, Shinozaki K, Tsumura T, Hamano T, Yagi Y, et al.
Therapeutic effect of cevimeline on dry eye in patients with Sjogren's syn- €
drome: a randomized, double-blind clinical study. Am J Ophthalmol
2004;138(1):6e17.
[361] Ramos-Casals M, Tzioufas AG, Stone JH, Siso A, Bosch X. Treatment of pri￾mary Sjogren syndrome: a systematic review. JAMA 2010;304:452e60.
[362] Akpek EK, Lindsley KB, Adyanthaya RS, Swamy R, Baer AN, McDonnell PJ.
Treatment of Sjogren's syndrome-associated dry eye an evidence-based re- €
view. Ophthalmology 2011;118(7):1242e52.
[363] Kossler AL, Wang J, Feuer W, Tse DT. Neurostimulation of the lacrimal nerve
for enhanced tear production. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 2015 Mar￾Apr;31(2):145e51.
[364] Famm K, Litt B, Tracey KJ, Boyden ES, Slaoui M. Drug discovery: a jump-start
for electroceuticals. Nature 2013;496(7444):159e61.
[365] Hyden D, Arlinger S. On the sneeze-re flex and its control. Rhinology
2007;45(3):218e9.
[366] Gumus K, Pflugfelder SC. Intranasal Tear Neurostimulation: An Emerging
Concept in the Treatment of Dry Eye. Int Ophthalmol Clin 2017;57(2):101e8.
[367] Baroody FM. How nasal function influences the eyes, ears, sinuses, and lungs.
Proc Am Thorac Soc 2011;8(1):53e61.
[368] Gupta A, Heigle T, Pflugfelder SC. Nasolacrimal stimulation of aqueous tear
production. Cornea 1997;16(6):645e8.
[369] Friedman NJ, Butron K, Robledo N, Loudin J, Baba SN, Chayet A. A non￾randomized, open-label study to evaluate the effect of nasal stimulation on
tear production in subjects with dry eye disease. Clin Ophthalmol 2016;10:
795e804.
[370] Gumus K, Schuetzle KL, Pflugfelder SC. Randomized Controlled Crossover
Trial Comparing the Impact of Sham or Intranasal Tear Neurostimulation on
Conjunctival Goblet Cell Degranulation. Am J Ophthalmol 2017;177:159e68.
[371] Craig JP, Cohn G, Corbett D, Tenen A, Coroneo M, McAlister J, et al. Evaluating
the Safety and Efficacy of Intranasal Neurostimulation for Dry Eye Disease: A
Double-masked, Randomized, Controlled, Multicenter Study. Optom Vis Sci
2016;94:160041. E-abstract.
[372] Craig JP, Friedman N, Torkildsen G, Ackermann M. Symptom Reduction with
Oculeve Intranasal Stimulator on Exposure to Environmental Challenge in
Dry Eye: A Randomized, Controlled, Crossover Trial. Optom Vis Sci 2016;94:
160057. E-abstract.
[373] Sano K, Kawashima M, Ikeura K, Arita R, Tsubota K. Abdominal breathing
increases tear secretion in healthy women. Ocul Surf 2015;13(1):82e7.
[374] Hirata H, Meng ID. Cold-sensitive corneal afferents respond to a variety of
ocular stimuli central to tear production: implications for dry eye disease.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51(8):3969e76.
[375] Belmonte C, Gallar J. Cold thermoreceptors, unexpected players in tear
production and ocular dryness sensations. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2011;52(6):3888e92.
[376] Nilius B, Voets T. Neurophysiology: channelling cold reception. Nature
2007;448(7150):147e8.
[377] Kovacs I, Luna C, Quirce S, Mizerska K, Callejo G, Riestra A, et al. Abnormal
activity of corneal cold thermoreceptors underlies the unpleasant sensations
in dry eye disease. Pain 2016;157(2):399e417.
[378] Osei KA, Ovenseri-Ogbomo G, Kyei S, Ntodie M. The effect of caffeine on tear
secretion. Optom Vis Sci 2014;91(2):171e7.
[379] Bron AJ, Benjamin L, Bilaniuk LT. Meibomian gland disease. Classification and
grading of lid changes. Eye 1991;5(4):395e411.
[380] Green-Church KB, Butovich I, Willcox M, Borchman D, Paulsen F, Barabino S,
et al. The international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of
the subcommittee on tear film lipids and lipid-protein interactions in health
and disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(4):1979e93.
[381] McCulley JP, Dougherty JM, Deneau DG. Classification of chronic blepharitis.
Ophthalmology 1982;89(10):1173e80.
[382] McCulley JP, Shine WE. Changing concepts in the diagnosis and management
of blepharitis. Cornea 2000;19(5):650e8.
[383] Nichols KK. The international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction:
introduction. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(4):1917e21.
[384] Nichols KK, Foulks GN, Bron AJ, Glasgow BJ, Dogru M, Tsubota K, et al. The
international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: executive sum￾mary. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(4):1922e9.
[385] Smith RE, Flowers Jr CW. Chronic blepharitis: a review. CLAO J 1995;21(3):
200e7.
[386] Key JE. A comparative study of eyelid cleaning regimens in chronic ble￾pharitis. CLAO J 1996;22(3):209e12.
[387] Romero JM, Biser SA, Perry HD, Levinson DH, Doshi SJ, Terraciano A, et al.
Conservative treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction. Eye Contact Lens
2004;30(1):14e9.
[388] Craig JP, Sung J, Wang MT, Cheung I, Sherwin T, Ismail S. Commercial lid
cleanser outperforms baby shampoo for management of blepharitis in ran￾domized, double-masked clinical trial. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2017;58. E￾abstract 2247eB0014.
[389] Geerling G, Tauber J, Baudouin C, Goto E, Matsumoto Y, O'Brien T, et al. The
international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of the
subcommittee on management and treatment of meibomian gland
dysfunction. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(4):2050e64.
[390] Alghamdi YA, Camp A, Feuer W, Karp CL, Wellik S, Galor A. Compliance and
Subjective Patient Responses to Eyelid Hygiene. Eye Contact Lens 2017. In
press.
[391] Coroneo MT, Rosenberg ML, Cheung LM. Ocular effects of cosmetic products
and procedures. Ocul Surf 2006;4(2):94e102.
[392] Goto T, Zheng X, Gibbon L, Ohashi Y. Cosmetic product migration onto the
ocular surface: exacerbation of migration after eyedrop instillation. Cornea
2010;29(4):400e3.
[393] Ng A, Evans K, North RV, Purslow C. Migration of Cosmetic Products into the
Tear Film. Eye Contact Lens 2015;41(5):304e9.
[394] Paugh JR, Knapp LL, Martinson JR, Hom MM. Meibomian therapy in prob￾lematic contact lens wear. Optom Vis Sci 1990;67(11):803e6.
[395] Guillon M, Maissa C, Wong S. Eyelid margin modification associated with
eyelid hygiene in anterior blepharitis and meibomian gland dysfunction. Eye
Contact Lens 2012;38(5):319e25.
[396] Guillon M, Maissa C, Wong S. Symptomatic relief associated with eyelid
hygiene in anterior blepharitis and MGD. Eye Contact Lens 2012;38(5):
306e12.
[397] Doan S. Tolerability and acceptability of Blephagel: a novel eyelid hygiene
aqueous gel. Clin Ophthalmol 2012;6:71e7.
[398] Khaireddin R, Hueber A. Eyelid hygiene for contact lens wearers with ble￾pharitis. Comparative investigation of treatment with baby shampoo versus
phospholipid solution. Ophthalmologe 2013;110:146e53.
[399] Arrúa M, Samudio M, Farina N, Cibils D, Laspina F, Sanabria R, et al. ~
Comparative study of the efficacy of different treatment options in patients
with chronic blepharitis. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol 2015;90(3):112e8.
[400] Ngo W, Srinivasan S, Houtman D, Jones L. The relief of dry eye signs and
symptoms using a combination of lubricants, lid hygiene and ocular nutra￾ceuticals. J Optom 2017;10(1):26e33.
[401] Benitez-Del-Castillo JM. How to promote and preserve eyelid health. Clin
Ophthalmol 2012;6:1689e98.
[402] Needle JJ, Petchey R, Lawrenson JG. A survey of the scope of therapeutic
practice by UK optometrists and their attitudes to an extended prescribing
role. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 2008;28(3):193e203.
[403] Jackson WB. Management of dysfunctional tear syndrome: a Canadian
consensus. Can J Ophthalmol 2009;44(4):385e94.
[404] Zhao YE, Wu LP, Hu L, Xu JR. Association of blepharitis with Demodex: a
meta-analysis. Ophthalmic Epidemiol 2012;19(2):95e102.
[405] Junk AK, Lukacs A, Kampik A. Topical administration of metronidazole gel as
an effective therapy alternative in chronic Demodex blepharitisea case
report. Klin Monbl Augenheilkd 1998;213:48e50.
[406] Czepita D, Kuzna-Grygiel W, Czepita M, Grobelny A. Demodex folliculorum
and Demodex brevis as a cause of chronic marginal blepharitis. Ann Acad
Med Stetin 2007;53:63e7. discussion 7.
[407] Fulk GW, Clifford C. A case report of demodicosis. J Am Optom Assoc
1990;61(8):637e9.
[408] Fulk GW, Murphy B, Robins MD. Pilocarpine gel for the treatment of
demodicosis-a case series. Optom Vis Sci 1996;73(12):742e5.
[409] Kheirkhah A, Casas V, Li W, Raju VK, Tseng SC. Corneal manifestations of
ocular demodex infestation. Am J Ophthalmol 2007;143(5):743e9.
[410] Gao YY, Di Pascuale MA, Elizondo A, Tseng SC. Clinical treatment of ocular
demodecosis by lid scrub with tea tree oil. Cornea 2007;26(2):136e43.
[411] Holzchuh FG, Hida RY, Moscovici BK, Villa Albers MB, Santo RM, Kara-Jose N, 
et al. Clinical treatment of ocular Demodex folliculorum by systemic iver￾mectin. Am J Ophthalmol 2011;151(6):1030e4. e1.
[412] Filho PA, Hazarbassanov RM, Grisolia AB, Pazos HB, Kaiserman I, Gomes JA. 
The efficacy of oral ivermectin for the treatment of chronic blepharitis in
patients tested positive for Demodex spp. Br J Ophthalmol 2011;95(6):
893e5.
[413] Koo H, Kim TH, Kim KW, Wee SW, Chun YS, Kim JC. Ocular surface
discomfort and Demodex: effect of tea tree oil eyelid scrub in Demodex
blepharitis. J Korean Med Sci 2012;27(12):1574e9.
[414] Gao YY, Xu DL, Huang lJ, Wang R, Tseng SC. Treatment of ocular itching
associated with ocular demodicosis by 5% tea tree oil ointment. Cornea
2012;31(1):14e7.
[415] Salem DA, El-Shazly A, Nabih N, El-Bayoumy Y, Saleh S. Evaluation of the
efficacy of oral ivermectin in comparison with ivermectin-metronidazole
combined therapy in the treatment of ocular and skin lesions of Demodex
folliculorum. Int J Infect Dis 2013;17(5):e343e7.
[416] Carson CF, Hammer KA, Riley TV. Melaleuca alternifolia (Tea Tree) oil: a
review of antimicrobial and other medicinal properties. Clin Microbiol Rev
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 617
2006;19(1):50e62.
[417] Gao YY, Di Pascuale MA, Li W, Baradaran-Rafii A, Elizondo A, Kuo CL, et al. In
vitro and in vivo killing of ocular Demodex by tea tree oil. Br J Ophthalmol
2005;89(11):1468e73.
[418] Tighe S, Gao YY, Tseng SC. Terpinen-4-ol is the Most Active Ingredient of Tea
Tree Oil to Kill Demodex Mites. Transl Vis Sci Technol 2013;2(7):2.
[419] Cheng AM, Sheha H, Tseng SC. Recent advances on ocular Demodex infes￾tation. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2015;26(4):295e300.
[420] Nicholls SG, Oakley CL, Tan A, Vote BJ. Demodex treatment in external ocular
disease: the outcomes of a Tasmanian case series. Int Ophthalmol
2016;36(5):691e6.
[421] Forstinger C, Kittler H, Binder M. Treatment of rosacea-like demodicidosis
with oral ivermectin and topical permethrin cream. J Am Acad Dermatol
1999;41(5 Pt 1):775e7.
[422] McCann LC, Tomlinson A, Pearce EI, Papa V. Effectiveness of artificial tears in
the management of evaporative dry eye. Cornea 2012;31(1):1e5.
[423] Sindt CW, Foulks GN. Efficacy of an artificial tear emulsion in patients with
dry eye associated with meibomian gland dysfunction. Clin Ophthalmol
2013;7:1713e22.
[424] Aguilar AJ, Marquez MI, Albera PA, Tredicce JL, Berra A. Effects of Systane(®)
Balance on noninvasive tear film break-up time in patients with lipid-defi-
cient dry eye. Clin Ophthalmol 2014;8:2365e72.
[425] Kaercher T, Thelen U, Brief G, Morgan-Warren RJ, Leaback R. A prospective,
multicenter, noninterventional study of Optive Plus(®) in the treatment of
patients with dry eye: the prolipid study. Clin Ophthalmol 2014;8:1147e55.
[426] Guthrie SE, Jones L, Blackie CA, Korb DR. A Comparative Study Between an
Oil-in-Water Emulsion and Nonlipid Eye Drops Used for Rewetting Contact
Lenses. Eye Contact Lens 2015;41(6):373e7.
[427] Ousler 3rd G, Devries DK, Karpecki PM, Ciolino JB. An evaluation of Retaine™
ophthalmic emulsion in the management of tear film stability and ocular
surface staining in patients diagnosed with dry eye. Clin Ophthalmol 2015;9:
235e43.
[428] Gan L, Wang J, Jiang M, Bartlett H, Ouyang D, Eperjesi F, et al. Recent ad￾vances in topical ophthalmic drug delivery with lipid-based nanocarriers.
Drug Discov Today 2013;18(5e6):290e7.
[429] Sim HS, Petznick A, Barbier S, Tan JH, Acharya UR, Yeo S, et al. A Randomized,
Controlled Treatment Trial of Eyelid-Warming Therapies in Meibomian
Gland Dysfunction. Ophthalmol Ther 2014;3(1e2):37e48.
[430] Villani Edoardo, Garoli Elena, Canton Veronica, Pichi Francesco, Nucci Paolo,
Ratiglia Roberto. Evaluation of a novel eyelid-warming device in meibomian
gland dysfunction unresponsive to traditional warm compress treatment: an
in vivo confocal study. Int Ophthalmol 2015;35(3):319e23.
[431] Lacroix Z, Leger S, Bitton E. Ex vivo heat retention of different eyelid 
warming masks. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2015;38(3):152e6.
[432] Bitton E, Lacroix Z, Leger S. In-vivo heat retention comparison of eyelid 
warming masks. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2016;39(4):311e5.
[433] Murakami DK, Blackie CA, Korb DR. All Warm Compresses Are Not Equally
Efficacious. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92(9):e327e33.
[434] Bron AJ, Tiffany JM. The contribution of meibomian disease to dry eye. Ocul
Surf 2004;2(2):149e65.
[435] Nichols KK, Ham BM, Nichols JJ, Ziegler C, Green-Church KB. Identification of
fatty acids and fatty acid amides in human meibomian gland secretions.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48(1):34e9.
[436] Olson MC, Korb DR, Greiner JV. Increase in tear film lipid layer thickness
following treatment with warm compresses in patients with meibomian
gland dysfunction. Eye Contact Lens 2003;29(2):96e9.
[437] Blackie CA, Korb DR, Knop E, Bedi R, Knop N, Holland EJ. Nonobvious
obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction. Cornea 2010;29(12):1333e45.
[438] Goto E, Endo K, Suzuki A, Fujikura Y, Tsubota K. Improvement of tear stability
following warm compression in patients with meibomian gland dysfunction.
Adv Exp Med Biol 2002;506(Pt B):1149e52.
[439] Tiffany JM. The lipid secretion of the meibomian glands. Adv Lipid Res
1987;22:1e62.
[440] Ong BL, Larke JR. Meibomian gland dysfunction: some clinical, biochemical
and physical observations. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 1990;10(2):144e8.
[441] Korb DR, Blackie CA. Meibomian gland diagnostic expressibility: correlation
with dry eye symptoms and gland location. Cornea 2008;27(10):1142e7.
[442] Arita R, Morishige N, Shirakawa R, Sato Y, Amano S. Effects of Eyelid
Warming Devices on Tear Film Parameters in Normal Subjects and Patients
with Meibomian Gland Dysfunction. Ocul Surf 2015;13(4):321e30.
[443] Blackie CA, Solomon JD, Greiner JV, Holmes M, Korb DR. Inner eyelid surface
temperature as a function of warm compress methodology. Optom Vis Sci
2008;85(8):675e83.
[444] Chang CM, Chu HT, Wei YH, Chen FP, Wang S, Wu PC, et al. The Core Pattern
Analysis on Chinese Herbal Medicine for Sjogren's syndrome: A Nationwide €
Population-Based Study. Sci Rep 2015;5:9541.
[445] Despa F, Orgill DP, Neuwalder J, Lee RC. The relative thermal stability of
tissue macromolecules and cellular structure in burn injury. Burns
2005;31(5):568e77.
[446] Moritz AR, Henriques FC. Studies of Thermal Injury: II. The Relative Impor￾tance of Time and Surface Temperature in the Causation of Cutaneous Burns.
Am J Pathol 1947;23(5):695e720.
[447] Plaghki L, Decruynaere C, Van Dooren P, Le Bars D. The fine tuning of pain
thresholds: a sophisticated double alarm system. PLoS One 2010;5:e10269.
[448] Blackie CA, McMonnies CW, Korb DR. Warm compresses and the risks of
elevated corneal temperature with massage. Cornea 2013;32(7):e146e9.
[449] Solomon JD, Case CL, Greiner JV, Blackie CA, Herman JP, Korb DR. Warm
compress induced visual degradation and Fischer-Schweitzer polygonal re-
flex. Optom Vis Sci 2007;84(7):580e7.
[450] McMonnies CW, Korb DR, Blackie CA. The role of heat in rubbing and mas￾sage-related corneal deformation. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2012;35(4):148e54.
[451] Man Lam S, Tong L, Duan X, Acharya UR, Tan JH, Petznick A, , et alWenk MR,
Shui G. J Lipid Res 2014;55(9):1959e69.
[452] Pearce EI, Archer CV, McWilliams MA, Tomlinson A, Fuller JR. Effects of novel
eye warming goggles on the tear film. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:
5601.
[453] Pult H, Riede-Pult BH, Purslow C. A comparison of an eyelid-warming device
to traditional compress therapy. Optom Vis Sci 2012;89(7):E1035e41.
[454] Doan S, Chiambaretta F, Baudouin C, ESPOIR study group. Evaluation of an
eyelid warming device (Blephasteam) for the management of ocular surface
diseases in France: the ESPOIR study. J Fr Ophtalmol 2014;37(10):763e72.
[455] Wang MT, Gokul A, Craig JP. Temperature profiles of patient-applied eyelid
warming therapies. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2015;38(6):430e4.
[456] Bilkhu PS, Naroo SA, Wolffsohn JS. Randomised masked clinical trial of the
MGDRx EyeBag for the treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction-related
evaporative dry eye. Br J Ophthalmol 2014;98(12):1707e11.
[457] Wang MT, Jaitley Z, Lord SM, Craig JP. Comparison of Self-applied Heat
Therapy for Meibomian Gland Dysfunction. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92(9):
e321e6.
[458] Goto E, Monden Y, Takano Y, Mori A, Shimmura S, Shimazaki J, et al.
Treatment of non-inflamed obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction by an
infrared warm compression device. Br J Ophthalmol 2002;86(12):1403e7.
[459] Lane SS, DuBiner HB, Epstein RJ, Ernest PH, Greiner JV, Hardten DR, et al. A
new system, the LipiFlow, for the treatment of meibomian gland dysfunc￾tion. Cornea 2012;31(4):396e404.
[460] Hom MM, Silverman MW. Displacement technique and meibomian gland
expression. J Am Optom Assoc 1987;58(3):223e6.
[461] Korb DR, Greiner JV. Increase in tear film lipid layer thickness following
treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction. Adv Exp Med Biol 1994;350:
293e8.
[462] McCulley JP, Sciallis GF. Meibomian keratoconjunctivitis. Am J Ophthalmol
1977;84(6):788e93.
[463] Korb DR, Henriquez AS. Meibomian gland dysfunction and contact lens
intolerance. J Am Optom Assoc 1980;51(3):243e51.
[464] Korb DR, Blackie CA. Meibomian gland therapeutic expression: quantifying
the applied pressure and the limitation of resulting pain. Eye Contact Lens
2011;37(5):298e301.
[465] Blackie CA, Carlson AN, Korb DR. Treatment for meibomian gland dysfunc￾tion and dry eye symptoms with a single-dose vectored thermal pulsation: a
review. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2015;26(4):306e13.
[466] Finis D, Konig C, Hayajneh J, Borrelli M, Schrader S, Geerling G. Six-month €
effects of a thermodynamic treatment for MGD and implications of meibo￾mian gland atrophy. Cornea 2014;33(12):1265e70.
[467] Blackie CA, Coleman CA, Holland EJ. The sustained effect (12 months) of a
single-dose vectored thermal pulsation procedure for meibomian gland
dysfunction and evaporative dry eye. Clin Ophthalmol 2016;10:1385e96.
[468] Greiner JV. Long-Term (3 Year) Effects of a Single Thermal Pulsation System
Treatment on Meibomian Gland Function and Dry Eye Symptoms. Eye
Contact Lens 2016;42(2):99e107.
[469] Goldberg DJ. Current trends in intense pulsed light. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol
2012;5(6):45e53.
[470] Craig JP, Chen YH, Turnbull PR. Prospective trial of intense pulsed light for
the treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2015;56(3):1965e70.
[471] Vegunta S, Patel D, Shen JF. Combination Therapy of Intense Pulsed Light
Therapy and Meibomian Gland Expression (IPL/MGX) Can Improve Dry Eye
Symptoms and Meibomian Gland Function in Patients With Refractory Dry
Eye: A Retrospective Analysis. Cornea 2016;35(3):318e22.
[472] Gupta PK, Vora GK, Matossian C, Kim M, Stinnett S. Outcomes of intense
pulsed light therapy for treatment of evaporative dry eye disease. Can J
Ophthalmol 2016;51(4):249e53.
[473] Maskin SL. Intraductal meibomian gland probing relieves symptoms of
obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction. Cornea 2010;29(10):1145e52.
[474] Fermon S, Hindi Zaga I, Alvarez Melloni D. Intraductal meibomian gland
probing for the treatment of blepharitis. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol 2015;90(2):
76e80.
[475] Nakayama N, Kawashima M, Kaido M, Arita R, Tsubota K. Analysis of Meibum
Before and After Intraductal Meibomian Gland Probing in Eyes With
Obstructive Meibomian Gland Dysfunction. Cornea 2015;34(10):1206e8.
[476] Wladis EJ. Intraductal meibomian gland probing in the management of
ocular rosacea. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 2012 Nov-Dec;28(6):416e8.
[477] Knop E, Knop N, Millar T, Obata H, Sullivan DA. The international workshop
on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of the subcommittee on anatomy,
physiology, and pathophysiology of the meibomian gland. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(4):1938e78.
[478] Korb DR, Blackie CA. Debridement-scaling: a new procedure that increases
Meibomian gland function and reduces dry eye symptoms. Cornea
2013;32(12):1554e7.
[479] Ngo W, Caffery B, Srinivasan S, Jones LW. Effect of Lid Debridement-Scaling
in Sjogren Syndrome Dry Eye. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92(9):e316 € e20.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 618
[480] McMonnies CW. Incomplete blinking: exposure keratopathy, lid wiper epi￾theliopathy, dry eye, refractive surgery, and dry contact lenses. Cont Lens
Anter Eye 2007;30(1):37e51.
[481] Pereira MV, Gloria AL. Semin Ophthalmol 2010;25(3):72 e8.
[482] Zeev MS, Miller DD, Latkany R. Diagnosis of dry eye disease and emerging
technologies. Clin Ophthalmol 2014;8:581e90.
[483] Bron AJ, de Paiva CS, Chauhan SK, Bonini S, Gabison EE, Jain S, et al. TFOS
DEWS II Pathophysiology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:438e510.
[484] Katz J, Kaufman HE. Corneal exposure during sleep (nocturnal lagoph￾thalmos). Arch Ophthalmol 1977;95(3):449e53.
[485] Sohrab M, Abugo U, Grant M, Merbs S. Management of the eye in facial
paralysis. Facial Plast Surg 2015;31(2):140e4.
[486] Vasquez LM, Medel R. Lagophthalmos after facial palsy: current therapeutic
options. Ophthalmic Res 2014;52(4):165e9.
[487] Latkany RL, Lock B, Speaker M. Nocturnal lagophthalmos: an overview and
classification. Ocul Surf 2006;4(1):44e53.
[488] So HM, Lee CC, Leung AK, Lim JM, Chan CS, Yan WW. Comparing the effec￾tiveness of polyethylene covers (Gladwrap) with lanolin (Duratears) eye
ointment to prevent corneal abrasions in critically ill patients: a randomized
controlled study. Int J Nurs Stud 2008;45(11):1565e71.
[489] Koroloff N, Boots R, Lipman J, Thomas P, Rickard C, Coyer F. A randomised
controlled study of the efficacy of hypromellose and Lacri-Lube combination
versus polyethylene/Cling wrap to prevent corneal epithelial breakdown in
the semiconscious intensive care patient. Intensive Care Med 2004;30(6):
1122e6.
[490] Kartush JM, Linstrom CJ, McCann PM, Graham MD. Early gold weight eyelid
implantation for facial paralysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1990;103(6):
1016e23.
[491] Linder T, Linstrom C, Robert Y. Rehabilitation of the eye in patients with
facial paralyses: indications and results of gold weight implantation. Klin
Monbl Augenheilkd 1997;210:293e5.
[492] Lucena A, Akaishi PM, Rodrigues Mde L, Cruz AA. Upper eyelid entropion and
dry eye in cicatricial trachoma without trichiasis. Arq Bras Oftalmol 2012
Nov-Dec;75(6):420e2.
[493] Geerling G, Borrelli M. Adnexal surgery for severe ocular surface disease.
Semin Ophthalmol 2005 Apr-Jun;20(2):101e12.
[494] Hintschich C. Correction of entropion and ectropion. Dev Ophthalmol
2008;41:85e102.
[495] Ross AH, Cannon PS, Selva D, Malhotra R. Management of upper eyelid
cicatricial entropion. Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2011;39(6):526e36.
[496] Al-Amry MA. Ocular manifestation of Ichthyosis. Saudi J Ophthalmol 2016
Jan-Mar;30(1):39e43.
[497] Damasceno RW, Avgitidou G, Belfort Jr R, Dantas PE, Holbach LM, Heindl LM.
Eyelid aging: pathophysiology and clinical management. Arq Bras Oftalmol
2015 Sep-Oct;78(5):328e31.
[498] Monga P, Gupta VP, Dhaliwal U. Clinical evaluation of changes in cornea and
tear film after surgery for trachomatous upper lid entropion. Eye (Lond)
2008;22(7):912e7.
[499] Cosar CB, Cohen EJ, Rapuano CJ, Maus M, Penne RP, Flanagan JC, et al. Tar￾sorrhaphy: clinical experience from a cornea practice. Cornea 2001;20(8):
787e91.
[500] Papas EB, Ciolino JB, Jacobs D, Miller WL, Miller WS, Pult H, et al. The TFOS
International Workshop on Contact Lens Discomfort: report of the man￾agement and therapy subcommittee. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54(11):
TFOS183e203.
[501] Koh S, Maeda N, Soma T, Hori Y, Tsujikawa M, Watanabe H, et al. Develop￾ment of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Keratitis in a Dry Eye
Patient With a Therapeutic Contact Lens. Eye Contact Lens Sci Clin Pract
2012;38(3):200e2.
[502] Henry CR, Flynn Jr HW, Miller D, Forster RK, Alfonso EC. Infectious keratitis
progressing to endophthalmitis: a 15-year study of microbiology, associated
factors, and clinical outcomes. Ophthalmology 2012;119(12):2443e9.
[503] Stapleton F, Keay L, Edwards K, Naduvilath T, Dart JK, Brian G, et al. The
incidence of contact lens-related microbial keratitis in Australia. Ophthal￾mology 2008;115(10):1655e62.
[504] Dart JK, Radford CF, Minassian D, Verma S, Stapleton F. Ophthalmology
2008;115(10):1647e54. 1654e1-3.
[505] Schein OD, Glynn RJ, Poggio EC, Seddon JM, Kenyon KR. The relative risk of
ulcerative keratitis among users of daily-wear and extended-wear soft
contact lenses. A case-control study. Microbial Keratitis Study Group. N Engl
J Med 1989;321(12):773e8.
[506] Stapleton F, Dart JK, Minassian D. Risk factors with contact lens related
suppurative keratitis. CLAO J 1993;19(4):204e10.
[507] Foulks GN, Harvey T, Raj CV. Therapeutic contact lenses: the role of high-Dk
lenses. Ophthalmol Clin North Am 2003;16(3):455e61.
[508] Ahad MA, Anandan M, Tah V, Dhingra S, Leyland M. Randomized Controlled
Study of Ocular Lubrication Versus Bandage Contact Lens in the Primary
Treatment of Recurrent Corneal Erosion Syndrome. Cornea 2013;32(10):
1311e4.
[509] Wipperman JL, Dorsch JN. Evaluation and management of corneal abrasions.
Am Fam Physician 2013;87(2):114e20.
[510] Siu GD, Young AL, Jhanji V. Alternatives to corneal transplantation for the
management of bullous keratopathy. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2014;25(4):
347e52.
[511] Grentzelos MA, Plainis S, Astyrakakis NI, Diakonis VF, Kymionis GD,
Kallinikos P, et al. Efficacy of 2 types of silicone hydrogel bandage contact
lenses after photorefractive keratectomy. J Cataract Refract Surg
2009;35(12):2103e8.
[512] Chen D, Lian Y, Li J, Ma Y, Shen M, Lu F. Monitor corneal epithelial healing
under bandage contact lens using ultrahigh-resolution optical coherence
tomography after pterygium surgery. Eye Contact Lens 2014;40(3):175e80.
[513] Daglioglu MC, Coskun M, Ilhan N, Tuzcu EA, Ilhan O, Keskin U, et al. The
effects of soft contact lens use on cornea and patient's recovery after auto￾graft pterygium surgery. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2014;37(3):175e7.
[514] Mohammadpour M, Amouzegar A, Hashemi H, Jabbarvand M, Kordbacheh H,
Rahimi F, et al. Comparison of Lotrafilcon B and Balafilcon A silicone hydrogel
bandage contact lenses in reducing pain and discomfort after photorefractive
keratectomy: A contralateral eye study. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2015;38(3):
211e4.
[515] Russo PA, Bouchard CS, Galasso JM. Extended-wear silicone hydrogel soft
contact lenses in the management of moderate to severe dry eye signs and
symptoms secondary to graft-versus-host disease. Eye Contact Lens
2007;33(3):144e7.
[516] Goyal S, Hamrah P. Understanding Neuropathic Corneal PaineGaps and
Current Therapeutic Approaches. Semin Ophthalmol 2016;31:59e70.
[517] Galor A, Levitt RC, Felix ER, Martin ER, Sarantopoulos CD. Neuropathic ocular
pain: an important yet underevaluated feature of dry eye. Eye (Lond)
2015;29(3):301e12.
[518] Smiddy WE, Hamburg TR, Kracher GP, Gottsch JD, Stark WJ. Therapeutic
contact lenses. Ophthalmology 1990;97(3):291e5.
[519] Lim L, Tan DT, Chan WK. Therapeutic use of Bausch & Lomb PureVision
contact lenses. CLAO J 2001;27(4):179e85.
[520] Jacobs DS, Rosenthal P. Boston scleral lens prosthetic device for treatment of
severe dry eye in chronic graft-versus-host disease. Cornea 2007;26(10):
1195e9.
[521] Schornack MM, Baratz KH, Patel SV, Maguire LJ. Jupiter scleral lenses in the
management of chronic graft versus host disease. Eye Contact Lens
2008;34(6):302e5.
[522] Takahide K, Parker PM, Wu M, Hwang WY, Carpenter PA, Moravec C, et al.
Use of fluid-ventilated, gas-permeable scleral lens for management of severe
keratoconjunctivitis sicca secondary to chronic graft-versus-host disease.
Biol Blood Marrow Transpl 2007;13(9):1016e21.
[523] Tougeron-Brousseau B, Delcampe A, Gueudry J, Vera L, Doan S, Hoang￾Xuan T, et al. Vision-Related Function After Scleral Lens Fitting in Ocular
Complications of Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrol￾ysis. Am J Ophthalmol 2009;148(6):852e9.
[524] Schein OD, Rosenthal P, Ducharme C. A gas-permeable scleral contact lens
for visual rehabilitation. Am J Ophthalmol 1990;109(3):318e22.
[525] Kok JH, Visser R. Treatment of ocular surface disorders and dry eyes with
high gas-permeable scleral lenses. Cornea 1992;11(6):518e22.
[526] Tan DT, Pullum KW, Buckley RJ. Medical applications of scleral contact len￾ses: 1. A retrospective analysis of 343 cases. Cornea 1995;14(2):121e9.
[527] Weyns M, Koppen C, Tassignon MJ. Scleral contact lenses as an alternative to
tarsorrhaphy for the long-term management of combined exposure and
neurotrophic keratopathy. Cornea 2013;32(3):359e61.
[528] Jacobs DS. Update on scleral lenses. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2008;19(4):
298e301.
[529] Schornack MM. Scleral lenses: a literature review. Eye Contact Lens
2015;41(1):3e11.
[530] van der Worp E, Bornman D, Ferreira DL, Faria-Ribeiro M, Garcia-Porta N,
Gonzalez-Meijome JM. Modern scleral contact lenses: A review. Cont Lens 
Anter Eye 2014;37(4):240e50.
[531] Heur M, Bach D, Theophanous C, Chiu GB. Prosthetic Replacement of the
Ocular Surface Ecosystem Scleral Lens Therapy for Patients With Ocular
Symptoms of Chronic Stevens-Johnson Syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol
2014;158(1):49e54.
[532] Papakostas TD, Le HG, Chodosh J, Jacobs DS. Prosthetic Replacement of the
Ocular Surface Ecosystem as Treatment for Ocular Surface Disease in Patients
with a History of StevenseJohnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.
Ophthalmology 2015;122(2):248e53.
[533] Bavinger JC, DeLoss K, Mian SI. Scleral lens use in dry eye syndrome. Curr
Opin Ophthalmol 2015;26(4):319e24.
[534] Sonsino J, Mathe DS. Central vault in dry eye patients successfully wearing
scleral lens. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90. e248e51; discussion 1030.
[535] Fernandes M, Sharma S. Polymicrobial and microsporidial keratitis in a pa￾tient using Boston scleral contact lens for Sjogren's syndrome and ocular
cicatricial pemphigoid. Contact Lens Anter Eye 2013;36(2):95e7.
[536] Alipour F, Kheirkhah A, Jabarvand Behrouz M. Use of mini scleral contact
lenses in moderate to severe dry eye. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2012;35(6):
272e6.
[537] Grey F, Carley F, Biswas S, Tromans C. Scleral contact lens management of
bilateral exposure and neurotrophic keratopathy. Cont Lens Anter Eye
2012;35(6):288e91.
[538] Wang Y, Kornberg DL, St Clair RM, Lee M, Muhic I, Ciralsky JB, et al. Corneal
nerve structure and function after long-term wear of fluid-filled scleral lens.
Cornea 2015;34(4):427e32.
[539] Belmonte C, Nichols JJ, Cox SM, Brock JA, Begley CG, Bereiter DA, et al. TFOS
DEWS II Pain and Sensation report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:404e37.
[540] Coronel MF, Labombarda F, Gonzalez SL. Neuroactive steroids, nociception 
and neuropathic pain: A flashback to go forward. Steroids 2016;110:77e87.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 619
[541] De Paiva CS, Corrales RM, Villarreal AL, Farley W, Li DQ, Stern ME, et al.
Apical corneal barrier disruption in experimental murine dry eye is abro￾gated by methylprednisolone and doxycycline. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2006;47(7):2847e56.
[542] De Paiva CS, Corrales RM, Villarreal AL, Farley WJ, Li DQ, Stern ME, et al.
Corticosteroid and doxycycline suppress MMP-9 and inflammatory cytokine
expression, MAPK activation in the corneal epithelium in experimental dry
eye. Exp Eye Res 2006;83(3):526e35.
[543] Lekhanont K, Leyngold IM, Suwan-Apichon O, Rangsin R, Chuck RS. Com￾parison of topical dry eye medications for the treatment of keratoconjunc￾tivitis sicca in a botulinum toxin B-induced mouse model. Cornea
2007;26(1):84e9.
[544] Okanobo A, Chauhan SK, Dastjerdi MH, Kodati S, Dana R. Efficacy of topical
blockade of interleukin-1 in experimental dry eye disease. Am J Ophthalmol
2012;154(1):63e71.
[545] Shafiee A, Bucolo C, Budzynski E, Ward KW, Lopez FJ. In vivo ocular ef ficacy
profile of mapracorat, a novel selective glucocorticoid receptor agonist, in
rabbit models of ocular disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(3):
1422e30.
[546] Ji YW, Seo Y, Choi W, Yeo A, Noh H, Kim EK, et al. Dry eye-induced
CCR7þCD11bþ cell lymph node homing is induced by COX-2 activities.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55(10):6829e38.
[547] Marsh P, Pflugfelder SC. Topical nonpreserved methylprednisolone therapy
for keratoconjunctivitis sicca in Sjogren syndrome. Ophthalmology €
1999;106(4):811e6.
[548] Sainz De La Maza Serra M, Simon Castellvi C, Kabbani O. Nonpreserved
topical steroids and lacrimal punctal occlusion for severe keratoconjuncti￾vitis sicca. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol 2000;75:751e6.
[549] Avunduk AM, Avunduk MC, Varnell ED, Kaufman HE. The comparison of
efficacies of topical corticosteroids and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drops on dry eye patients: a clinical and immunocytochemical study. Am J
Ophthalmol 2003;136(4):593e602.
[550] Pflugfelder SC, Maskin SL, Anderson B, Chodosh J, Holland EJ, De Paiva CS,
et al. A randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled, multicenter com￾parison of loteprednol etabonate ophthalmic suspension, 0.5%, and placebo
for treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in patients with delayed tear
clearance. Am J Ophthalmol 2004;138:444e57.
[551] Lee HK, Ryu IH, Seo KY, Hong S, Kim HC, Kim EK. Topical 0.1% prednisolone
lowers nerve growth factor expression in keratoconjunctivitis sicca patients.
Ophthalmology 2006;113:198e205.
[552] Yang CQ, Sun W, Gu YS. A clinical study of the efficacy of topical cortico￾steroids on dry eye. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B 2006;7(8):675e8.
[553] Jonisch J, Steiner A, Udell IJ. Preservative-free low-dose dexamethasone for
the treatment of chronic ocular surface disease refractory to standard
therapy. Cornea 2010;29(7):723e6.
[554] Sheppard JD, Donnenfeld ED, Holland EJ, Slonim CB, Solomon R, Solomon KD,
et al. Effect of loteprednol etabonate 0.5% on initiation of dry eye treatment
with topical cyclosporine 0.05%. Eye Contact Lens 2014;40(5):289e96.
[555] Kheirkhah A, Dohlman TH, Amparo F, Arnoldner MA, Jamali A, Hamrah P,
et al. Effects of corneal nerve density on the response to treatment in dry eye
disease. Ophthalmology 2015;122(4):662e8.
[556] Lin T, Gong L. Topical fluorometholone treatment for ocular dryness in pa￾tients with Sjogren syndrome: a randomized clinical trial in China. Med
Baltim 2015;94:e551.
[557] Pinto-Fraga Jose, L opez-Miguel Alberto, Gonz alez-García María J,
Fernandez Itziar, L opez-de-la-Rosa Alberto, Enríquez-de-Salamanca Amalia, 
et al. Topical Fluorometholone Protects the Ocular Surface of Dry Eye Pa￾tients from Desiccating Stress. Ophthalmology 2016;123(1):141e53.
[558] Villani E, Garoli E, Termine V, Pichi F, Ratiglia R, Nucci P. Corneal Confocal
Microscopy in Dry Eye Treated with Corticosteroids. Optom Vis Sci
2015;92(9):e290e5.
[559] Hong S, Kim T, Chung SH, Kim EK, Seo KY. Recurrence after topical non￾preserved methylprednisolone therapy for keratoconjunctivitis sicca in
Sjogren's syndrome. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2007;23(1):78 € e82.
[560] McGhee CN, Dean S, Danesh-Meyer H. Locally administered ocular cortico￾steroids: benefits and risks. Drug Saf 2002;25(1):33e55.
[561] LeHoang P. The gold standard of noninfectious uveitis: corticosteroids. Dev
Ophthalmol 2012;51:7e28.
[562] Mataftsi A, Narang A, Moore W, Nischal KK. Do reducing regimens of fluo￾rometholone for paediatric ocular surface disease cause glaucoma? Br J
Ophthalmol 2011;95(11):1531e3.
[563] Bilgihan K, Gürelik G, Akata F, Hasanreisoglu B. Fluorometholone-induced
cataract after photorefractive keratectomy. Ophthalmologica 1997;211(6):
394e6.
[564] Sheppard JD, Comstock TL, Cavet ME. Impact of the Topical Ophthalmic
Corticosteroid Loteprednol Etabonate on Intraocular Pressure. Adv Ther
2016;33(4):532e52.
[565] Byun YJ, Kim TI, Kwon SM, Seo KY, Kim SW, Kim EK, et al. Efficacy of com￾bined 0.05% cyclosporine and 1% methylprednisolone treatment for chronic
dry eye. Cornea 2012;31(5):509e13.
[566] Chen W, Li Z, Hu J, Zhang Z, Chen L, Chen Y, et al. Corneal alternations
induced by topical application of benzalkonium chloride in rabbit. PLoS One
2011;6:e26103.
[567] Kim YH, Jung JC, Jung SY, Yu S, Lee KW, Park YJ. Comparison of the Efficacy of
Fluorometholone With and Without Benzalkonium Chloride in Ocular
Surface Disease. Cornea 2016;35(2):234e42.
[568] Barbarino JM, Staatz CE, Venkataramanan R, Klein TE, Altman RB. PharmGKB
summary: cyclosporine and tacrolimus pathways. Pharmacogenet Genomics
2013;23(10):563e85.
[569] Donnenfeld E, Pflugfelder SC. Topical ophthalmic cyclosporine: pharma￾cology and clinical uses. Surv Ophthalmol 2009 May-Jun;54(3):321e38.
[570] Matsuda S, Koyasu S. Mechanisms of action of cyclosporine. Immuno￾pharmacology 2000;47(2e3):119e25.
[571] Haddad EM, McAlister VC, Renouf E, Malthaner R, Kjaer MS, Gluud LL.
Cyclosporin versus tacrolimus for liver transplanted patients. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2006;(4):CD005161.
[572] Gorantla VS, Barker JH, Jones Jr JW, Prabhune K, Maldonado C, Granger DK.
Immunosuppressive agents in transplantation: mechanisms of action and
current anti-rejection strategies. Microsurgery 2000;20(8):420e9.
[573] Kumar NS, Khosla R, Makharia GK. Cyclosporine in steroid refractory acute
severe colitis. Trop Gastroenterol 2014;35(Suppl 1):S21e8.
[574] Gremese E, Ferraccioli GF. Benefit/risk of cyclosporine in rheumatoid
arthritis. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2004 Sep-Oct;22(5 Suppl 35):S101e7.
[575] Utine CA, Stern M, Akpek EK. Clinical review: topical ophthalmic use of
cyclosporin A. Ocul Immunol Inflamm 2010;18(5):352e61.
[576] Keklikci U, Dursun B, Cingu AK. Topical cyclosporine a 0.05% eyedrops in the
treatment of vernal keratoconjunctivitis - randomized placebo-controlled
trial. Adv Clin Exp Med 2014;23:455e61.
[577] Gonzalez-Lopez JJ, Lopez-Alcalde J, Morcillo Laiz R, Fernandez Buenaga R,
Rebolleda Fernandez G. Topical cyclosporine for atopic keratoconjunctivitis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;9:CD009078.
[578] Kim BY, Riaz KM, Bakhtiari P, Chan CC, Welder JD, Holland EJ, et al. Medically
reversible limbal stem cell disease: clinical features and management stra￾tegies. Ophthalmology 2014;121(10):2053e8.
[579] Kunert KS, Tisdale AS, Stern ME, Smith JA, Gipson IK. Analysis of topical
cyclosporine treatment of patients with dry eye syndrome: effect on
conjunctival lymphocytes. Arch Ophthalmol 2000;118(11):1489e96.
[580] Brignole F, Pisella PJ, De Saint Jean M, Goldschild M, Goguel A, Baudouin C.
Flow cytometric analysis of inflammatory markers in KCS: 6-month treat￾ment with topical cyclosporin A. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42(1):90e5.
[581] Gao J, Sana R, Calder V, Calonge M, Lee W, Wheeler LA, et al. Mitochondrial
permeability transition pore in inflammatory apoptosis of human conjunc￾tival epithelial cells and T cells: effect of cyclosporin A. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2013;54:4717e33.
[582] Tsubota K, Fujita H, Tadano K, Takeuchi T, Murakami T, Saito I, et al.
Improvement of lacrimal function by topical application of CyA in murine
models of Sjogren's syndrome. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42(1): €
101e10.
[583] Brignole F, Pisella PJ, Goldschild M, De Saint Jean M, Goguel A, Baudouin C.
Flow cytometric analysis of inflammatory markers in conjunctival epithelial
cells of patients with dry eyes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41(6):
1356e63.
[584] Strong B, Farley W, Stern ME, Pflugfelder SC. Topical cyclosporine inhibits
conjunctival epithelial apoptosis in experimental murine keratoconjuncti￾vitis sicca. Cornea 2005;24(1):80e5.
[585] Gao J, Gelber-Schwalb TA, Addeo JV, Stern ME. Apoptosis in the lacrimal
gland and conjunctiva of dry eye dogs. Adv Exp Med Biol 1998;438:453e60.
[586] Sall K, Stevenson OD, Mundorf TK, Reis BL. Two multicenter, randomized
studies of the efficacy and safety of cyclosporine ophthalmic emulsion in
moderate to severe dry eye disease. CsA Phase 3 Study Group. Ophthal￾mology 2000;107(4):631e9.
[587] Pflugfelder SC, De Paiva CS, Villarreal AL, Stern ME. Effects of sequential
artificial tear and cyclosporine emulsion therapy on conjunctival goblet cell
density and transforming growth factor-beta2 production. Cornea
2008;27(1):64e9.
[588] Baiza-Duran L, Medrano-Palafox J, Hernandez-Quintela E, Lozano-Alcazar J, 
Alaníz-de la O JF. A comparative clinical trial of the efficacy of two different
aqueous solutions of cyclosporine for the treatment of moderate-to-severe
dry eye syndrome. Br J Ophthalmol 2010;94(10):1312e5.
[589] Chen M, Gong L, Sun X, Xie H, Zhang Y, Zou L, et al. A comparison of
cyclosporine 0.05% ophthalmic emulsion versus vehicle in Chinese patients
with moderate to severe dry eye disease: an eight-week, multicenter, ran￾domized, double-blind, parallel-group trial. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2010;26:
361e6.
[590] Su MY, Perry HD, Barsam A, Perry AR, Donnenfeld ED, Wittpenn JR, et al. The
effect of decreasing the dosage of cyclosporine A 0.05% on dry eye disease
after 1 year of twice-daily therapy. Cornea 2011;30(10):1098e104.
[591] Deveci H, Kobak S. The efficacy of topical 0.05 % cyclosporine A in patients
with dry eye disease associated with Sjogren's syndrome. Int Ophthalmol
2014;34:1043e8.
[592] Salib GM, McDonald MB, Smolek M. Safety and efficacy of cyclosporine 0.05%
drops versus unpreserved artificial tears in dry-eye patients having laser in
situ keratomileusis. J Cataract Refract Surg 2006;32:772e8.
[593] Perry HD, Solomon R, Donnenfeld ED, Perry AR, Wittpenn JR, Greenman HE,
et al. Evaluation of topical cyclosporine for the treatment of dry eye disease.
Arch Ophthalmol 2008;126(8):1046e50.
[594] Alves M, Fonseca EC, Alves MF, Malki LT, Arruda GV, Reinach PS, et al. Dry
eye disease treatment: a systematic review of published trials and a critical
appraisal of therapeutic strategies. Ocul Surf 2013;11(3):181e92.
[595] Sacchetti M, Mantelli F, Lambiase A, Mastropasqua A, Merlo D, Bonini S.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 620
Systematic review of randomised clinical trials on topical ciclosporin A for
the treatment of dry eye disease. Br J Ophthalmol 2014;98(8):1016e22.
[596] Zhou XQ, Wei RL. Topical cyclosporine A in the treatment of dry eye: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Cornea 2014;33(7):760e7.
[597] Wan KH, Chen LJ, Young AL. Efficacy and Safety of Topical 0.05% Cyclosporine
Eye Drops in the Treatment of Dry Eye Syndrome: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis. Ocul Surf 2015;13(3):213e25.
[598] Brown MM, Brown GC, Brown HC, Peet J, Roth Z. Value-based medicine,
comparative effectiveness, and cost-effectiveness analysis of topical cyclo￾sporine for the treatment of dry eye syndrome. Arch Ophthalmol
2009;127(2):146e52.
[599] Perry HD, Doshi-Carnevale S, Donnenfeld ED, Solomon R, Biser SA, Bloom AH.
Efficacy of commercially available topical cyclosporine A 0.05% in the
treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction. Cornea 2006;25(2):171e5.
[600] Rubin M, Rao SN. Efficacy of topical cyclosporin 0.05% in the treatment of
posterior blepharitis. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2006;22(1):47e53.
[601] Schechter BA, Katz RS, Friedman LS. Efficacy of topical cyclosporine for the
treatment of ocular rosacea. Adv Ther 2009;26(6):651e9.
[602] Prabhasawat P, Tesavibul N, Karnchanachetanee C, Kasemson S. Efficacy of
cyclosporine 0.05% eye drops in Stevens Johnson syndrome with chronic dry
eye. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2013;29(3):372e7.
[603] Wilson SE, Perry HD. Long-term resolution of chronic dry eye symptoms and
signs after topical cyclosporine treatment. Ophthalmology 2007;114(1):
76e9.
[604] Leonardi A, Van Setten G, Amrane M, Ismail D, Garrigue JS, Figueiredo FC,
et al. Efficacy and safety of 0.1% cyclosporine A cationic emulsion in the
treatment of severe dry eye disease: a multicenter randomized trial. Eur J
Ophthalmol 2016;26(4):287e96.
[605] Takeuchi H, Okuyama K, Konno O, Jojima Y, Akashi I, Nakamura Y, et al.
Optimal dose and target trough level in cyclosporine and tacrolimus con￾version in renal transplantation as evaluated by lymphocyte drug sensitivity
and pharmacokinetic parameters. Transplant Proc 2005;37(4):1745e7.
[606] Sanz-Marco E, Udaondo P, García-Delpech S, Vazquez A, Diaz-Llopis M.
Treatment of refractory dry eye associated with graft versus host disease
with 0.03% tacrolimus eyedrops. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2013;29(8):776e83.
[607] Moscovici BK, Holzchuh R, Sakassegawa-Naves FE, Hoshino-Ruiz DR,
Albers MB, Santo RM, et al. Treatment of Sjogren's syndrome dry eye using €
0.03% tacrolimus eye drop: Prospective double-blind randomized study.
Cont Lens Anter Eye 2015;38(5):373e8.
[608] Liu X, Wang S, Kao AA, Long Q. The effect of topical pranoprofen 0.1% on the
clinical evaluation and conjunctival HLA-DR expression in dry eyes. Cornea
2012;31(11):1235e9.
[609] Rolando M, Barabino S, Alongi S, Calabria G. Topical non-preserved diclofe￾nac therapy for keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Adv Exp Med Biol 2002;506(Pt B):
1237e40.
[610] Aragona P, Stilo A, Ferreri F, Mobrici M. Effects of the topical treatment with
NSAIDs on corneal sensitivity and ocular surface of Sjogren's syndrome pa- €
tients. Eye (Lond) 2005;19(5):535e9.
[611] Schechter BA. Ketorolac during the induction phase of cyclosporin-A ther￾apy. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2006;22(2):150e4.
[612] Sawazaki R, Ishihara T, Usui S, Hayashi E, Tahara K, Hoshino T, et al. Diclo￾fenac protects cultured human corneal epithelial cells against hyper￾osmolarity and ameliorates corneal surface damage in a rat model of dry eye.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:2547e56.
[613] Avisar R, Robinson A, Appel I, Yassur Y, Weinberger D. Diclofenac sodium,
0.1% (Voltaren Ophtha), versus sodium chloride, 5%, in the treatment of
filamentary keratitis. Cornea 2000;19(2):145e7.
[614] Isawi H, Dhaliwal DK. Corneal melting and perforation in Stevens Johnson
syndrome following topical bromfenac use. J Cataract Refract Surg
2007;33(9):1644e6.
[615] Singer DD, Kennedy J, Wittpenn JR. Topical NSAIDs effect on corneal sensi￾tivity. Cornea 2015;34(5):541e3.
[616] Aragona P, Di Pietro R. Is it safe to use topical NSAIDs for corneal sensitivity
in Sjogren's syndrome patients? Expert Opin Drug Saf 2007;6(1):33 € e43.
[617] Swann DA, Sotman S, Dixon M, Brooks C. The isolation and partial charac￾terization of the major glycoprotein (LGP-I) from the articular lubricating
fraction from bovine synovial fluid. Biochem J 1977;161(3):473e85.
[618] Schmidt TA, Sullivan DA, Knop E, Richards SM, Knop N, Liu S, et al. Tran￾scription, translation, and function of lubricin, a boundary lubricant, at the
ocular surface. JAMA Ophthalmol 2013;131(6):766e76.
[619] Schmidt TA, Gastelum NS, Nguyen QT, Schumacher BL, Sah RL. Boundary
lubrication of articular cartilage: role of synovial fluid constituents. Arthritis
Rheum 2007;56(3):882e91.
[620] Das S, Banquy X, Zappone B, Greene GW, Jay GD, Israelachvili JN. Synergistic
interactions between grafted hyaluronic acid and lubricin provide enhanced
wear protection and lubrication. Biomacromolecules 2013;14(5):1669e77.
[621] Bonnevie ED, Galesso D, Secchieri C, Cohen I, Bonassar LJ. Elastoviscous
Transitions of Articular Cartilage Reveal a Mechanism of Synergy between
Lubricin and Hyaluronic Acid. PLoS One 2015;10:e0143415.
[622] Iqbal SM, Leonard C, Regmi SC, De Rantere D, Tailor P, Ren G, et al. Lubricin/
Proteoglycan 4 binds to and regulates the activity of Toll-Like Receptors In
Vitro. Sci Rep 2016;6:18910.
[623] Alquraini A, Garguilo S, D'Souza G, Zhang LX, Schmidt TA, Jay GD, et al. The
interaction of lubricin/proteoglycan 4 (PRG4) with toll-like receptors 2 and
4: an anti-inflammatory role of PRG4 in synovial fluid. Arthritis Res Ther
2015;17:353.
[624] Al-Sharif A, Jamal M, Zhang LX, Larson K, Schmidt TA, Jay GD, et al. Lubricin/
Proteoglycan 4 Binding to CD44 Receptor: A Mechanism of the Suppression
of Proinflammatory Cytokine-Induced Synoviocyte Proliferation by Lubricin
2015;67(6):1503e13.
[625] Samsom ML, Morrison S, Masala N, Sullivan BD, Sullivan DA, Sheardown H,
et al. Characterization of full-length recombinant human Proteoglycan 4 as
an ocular surface boundary lubricant. Exp Eye Res 2014;127:14e9.
[626] Lambiase A, Sullivan BD, Schmidt TA, Sullivan DA, Jay GD, Truitt ER, et al. A
Two-Week, Randomized, Double-masked Study to Evaluate Safety and Effi-
cacy of Lubricin (150 mug/mL) Eye Drops Versus Sodium Hyaluronate (HA)
0.18% Eye Drops (Vismed(R)) in Patients with Moderate Dry Eye Disease.
Ocul Surf 2017;15:77e87.
[627] Lee HK, Lee KS, Kim HC, Lee SH, Kim EK. Nerve growth factor concentration
and implications in photorefractive keratectomy vs laser in situ keratomil￾eusis. Am J Ophthalmol 2005;139(6):965e71.
[628] Yoon JS, Choi SH, Lee JH, Lee SJ, Lee SY. Ocular surface inflammation, and
nerve growth factor level in tears in active thyroid-associated ophthalm￾opathy. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2010;248(2):271e6.
[629] Lambiase A, Micera A, Sacchetti M, Cortes M, Mantelli F, Bonini S. Alterations
of tear neuromediators in dry eye disease. Arch Ophthalmol 2011;129(8):
981e6.
[630] Patapoutian A, Reichardt LF. Trk receptors: mediators of neurotrophin action.
Curr Opin Neurobiol 2001;11(3):272e80.
[631] de Castro F, Silos-Santiago I, Lopez de Armentia M, Barbacid M, Belmonte C. 
Corneal innervation and sensitivity to noxious stimuli in trkA knockout mice.
Eur J Neurosci 1998;10(1):146e52.
[632] Qi H, Li DQ, Shine HD, Chen Z, Yoon KC, Jones DB, et al. Nerve growth factor
and its receptor TrkA serve as potential markers for human corneal epithelial
progenitor cells. Exp Eye Res 2008;86(1):34e40.
[633] Coassin M, Lambiase A, Costa N, De Gregorio A, Sgrulletta R, Sacchetti M,
et al. Efficacy of topical nerve growth factor treatment in dogs affected by
dry eye. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2005;243(2):151e5.
[634] Bonini S, Rama P, Olzi D, Lambiase A. Neurotrophic keratitis. Eye (Lond)
2003;17(8):989e95.
[635] Ma K, Yan N, Huang Y, Cao G, Deng J, Deng Y. Effects of nerve growth factor
on nerve regeneration after corneal nerve damage. Int J Clin Exp Med
2014;7(11):4584e9.
[636] Jain P, Li R, Lama T, Saragovi HU, Cumberlidge G, Meerovitch K. An NGF
mimetic, MIM-D3, stimulates conjunctival cell glycoconjugate secretion and
demonstrates therapeutic efficacy in a rat model of dry eye. Exp Eye Res
2011;93(4):503e12.
[637] Meerovitch K, Torkildsen G, Lonsdale J, Goldfarb H, Lama T, Cumberlidge G,
et al. Safety and efficacy of MIM-D3 ophthalmic solutions in a randomized,
placebo-controlled Phase 2 clinical trial in patients with dry eye. Clin Oph￾thalmol 2013;7:1275e85.
[638] Lee RH, Pulin AA, Seo MJ, Kota DJ, Ylostalo J, Larson BL, et al. Intravenous
hMSCs improve myocardial infarction in mice because cells embolized in
lung are activated to secrete the anti-inflammatory protein TSG-6. Cell Stem
Cell 2009;5(1):54e63.
[639] Roddy GW, Oh JY, Lee RH, Bartosh TJ, Ylostalo J, Coble K, et al. Action at a
distance: systemically administered adult stem/progenitor cells (MSCs)
reduce inflammatory damage to the cornea without engraftment and pri￾marily by secretion of TNF-alpha stimulated gene/protein 6. Stem Cells
2011;29:1572e9.
[640] Choi H, Lee RH, Bazhanov N, Oh JY, Prockop DJ. Anti-inflammatory protein
TSG-6 secreted by activated MSCs attenuates zymosan-induced mouse
peritonitis by decreasing TLR2/NF-kB signaling in resident macrophages.
Blood 2011;118(2):330e8.
[641] Kim JA, Ko JH, Ko AY, Lee HJ, Kim MK, Wee WR, et al. TSG-6 protects corneal
endothelium from transcorneal cryoinjury in rabbits. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2014;55(8):4905e12.
[642] Kim YJ, Ryu JS, Park SY, Lee HJ, Ko JH, Kim MK, et al. Comparison of Topical
Application of TSG-6, Cyclosporine, and Prednisolone for Treating Dry Eye.
Cornea 2016;35(4):536e42.
[643] Oh JY, Roddy GW, Choi H, Lee RH, Ylostalo JH, Rosa Jr RH, et al. Anti-in- €
flammatory protein TSG-6 reduces inflammatory damage to the cornea
following chemical and mechanical injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2010;107(39):16875e80.
[644] Lee MJ, Kim DH, Ryu JS, Ko AY, Ko JH, Kim MK, et al. Topical TSG-6
Administration Protects the Ocular Surface in Two Mouse Models of
Inflammation-Related Dry Eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:5175e81.
[645] Furst DE. Anakinra: review of recombinant human interleukin-I receptor
antagonist in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Clin Ther 2004;26(12):
1960e75.
[646] Arend WP. Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. Adv Immunol 1993;54:
167e227.
[647] Yamada J, Dana MR, Sotozono C, Kinoshita S. Local suppression of IL-1 by
receptor antagonist in the rat model of corneal alkali injury. Exp Eye Res
2003;76(2):161e7.
[648] Keane-Myers AM, Miyazaki D, Liu G, Dekaris I, Ono S, Dana MR. Prevention of
allergic eye disease by treatment with IL-1 receptor antagonist. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1999;40(12):3041e6.
[649] Biswas PS, Banerjee K, Zheng M, Rouse BT. Counteracting corneal immu￾noinflammatory lesion with interleukin-1 receptor antagonist protein. J
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 621
Leukoc Biol 2004;76(4):868e75.
[650] Stapleton WM, Chaurasia SS, Medeiros FW, Mohan RR, Sinha S, Wilson SE.
Topical interleukin-1 receptor antagonist inhibits inflammatory cell infil￾tration into the cornea. Exp Eye Res 2008;86(5):753e7.
[651] Vijmasi T, Chen FY, Chen YT, Gallup M, McNamara N. Topical administration
of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist as a therapy for aqueous-deficient dry
eye in autoimmune disease. Mol Vis 2013;19:1957e65.
[652] Amparo F, Dastjerdi MH, Okanobo A, Ferrari G, Smaga L, Hamrah P, et al.
Topical interleukin 1 receptor antagonist for treatment of dry eye disease: a
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Ophthalmol 2013;131(6):715e23.
[653] Aggarwal BB. Signalling pathways of the TNF superfamily: a double-edged
sword. Nat Rev Immunol 2003;3(9):745e56.
[654] Cope AP, Londei M, Chu NR, Cohen SB, Elliott MJ, Brennan FM, et al. Chronic
exposure to tumor necrosis factor (TNF) in vitro impairs the activation of T
cells through the T cell receptor/CD3 complex; reversal in vivo by anti-TNF
antibodies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J Clin Invest 1994;94(2):
749e60.
[655] Pflugfelder SC, Jones D, Ji Z, Afonso A, Monroy D. Altered cytokine balance in
the tear fluid and conjunctiva of patients with Sjogren's syndrome kerato- €
conjunctivitis sicca. Curr Eye Res 1999;19(3):201e11.
[656] Yoon KC, Jeong IY, Park YG, Yang SY. Interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor￾alpha levels in tears of patients with dry eye syndrome. Cornea 2007;26(4):
431e7.
[657] Lam H, Bleiden L, de Paiva CS, Farley W, Stern ME, Pflugfelder SC. Tear
cytokine profiles in dysfunctional tear syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol
2009;147(2):198e205. e1.
[658] Mariette X, Ravaud P, Steinfeld S, Baron G, Goetz J, Hachulla E, et al. Inefficacy
of infliximab in primary Sjogren's syndrome: results of the randomized, €
controlled Trial of Remicade in Primary Sjogren's Syndrome (TRIPSS). €
Arthritis Rheum 2004;50(4):1270e6.
[659] Sankar V, Brennan MT, Kok MR, Leakan RA, Smith JA, Manny J, et al. Eta￾nercept in Sjogren's syndrome: a twelve-week randomized, double-blind, €
placebo-controlled pilot clinical trial. Arthritis Rheum 2004;50(7):2240e5.
[660] Zandbelt MM, de Wilde P, van Damme P, Hoyng CB, van de Putte L, van den
Hoogen F. Etanercept in the treatment of patients with primary Sjogren's €
syndrome: a pilot study. J Rheumatol 2004;31(1):96e101.
[661] Moutsopoulos NM, Katsifis GE, Angelov N, Leakan RA, Sankar V, Pillemer S,
et al. Lack of efficacy of etanercept in Sjogren syndrome correlates with €
failed suppression of tumour necrosis factor alpha and systemic immune
activation. Ann Rheum Dis 2008;67(10):1437e43.
[662] Li Z, Choi W, Oh HJ, Yoon KC. Effectiveness of topical infliximab in a mouse
model of experimental dry eye. Cornea 2012;31(Suppl 1):S25e31.
[663] Ji YW, Byun YJ, Choi W, Jeong E, Kim JS, Noh H, et al. Neutralization of ocular
surface TNF-a reduces ocular surface and lacrimal gland inflammation
induced by in vivo dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54(12):7557e66.
[664] Zheng X, de Paiva CS, Li DQ, Farley WJ, Pflugfelder SC. Desiccating stress
promotion of Th17 differentiation by ocular surface tissues through a den￾dritic cell-mediated pathway. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51(6):
3083e91.
[665] Chauhan SK, Dana R. Role of Th17 cells in the immunopathogenesis of dry
eye disease. Mucosal Immunol 2009;2(4):375e6.
[666] De Paiva CS, Chotikavanich S, Pangelinan SB, Pitcher 3rd JD, Fang B, Zheng X,
et al. IL-17 disrupts corneal barrier following desiccating stress. Mucosal
Immunol 2009;2(3):243e53.
[667] Chauhan SK, Jin Y, Goyal S, Lee HS, Fuchsluger TA, Lee HK, et al. A novel pro￾lymphangiogenic function for Th17/IL-17. Blood 2011;118(17):4630e4.
[668] Peral A, Domínguez-Godínez CO, Carracedo G, Pintor J. Therapeutic targets in
dry eye syndrome. Drug News Perspect 2008;21(3):166e76.
[669] Kam WR, Sullivan DA. Neurotransmitter influence on human meibomian
gland epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(12):8543e8.
[670] Lambiase A, Sacchetti M, Bonini S. Nerve growth factor therapy for corneal
disease. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2012;23(4):296e302.
[671] Millard M, Odde S, Neamati N. Integrin targeted therapeutics. Theranostics
2011;1:154e88.
[672] Marlin SD, Springer TA. Purified intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1)
is a ligand for lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1). Cell
1987;51(5):813e9.
[673] Grakoui A, Bromley SK, Sumen C, Davis MM, Shaw AS, Allen PM, et al. The
immunological synapse: a molecular machine controlling T cell activation.
Science 1999;285(5425):221e7.
[674] Zhong M, Gadek TR, Bui M, Shen W, Burnier J, Barr KJ, et al. Discovery and
Development of Potent LFA-1/ICAM-1 Antagonist SAR 1118 as an
Ophthalmic Solution for Treating Dry Eye. ACS Med Chem Lett 2012;3(3):
203e6.
[675] Sun Y, Zhang R, Gadek TR, O'Neill CA, Pearlman E. Corneal inflammation is
inhibited by the LFA-1 antagonist, lifitegrast (SAR 1118). J Ocul Pharmacol
Ther 2013;29(4):395e402.
[676] Perez VL, Pflugfelder SC, Zhang S, Shojaei A, Haque R. Lifitegrast, a Novel
Integrin Antagonist for Treatment of Dry Eye Disease. Ocul Surf 2016;14(2):
207e15.
[677] Semba CP, Torkildsen GL, Lonsdale JD, McLaurin EB, Geffin JA, Mundorf TK,
et al. A phase 2 randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled study of a
novel integrin antagonist (SAR 1118) for the treatment of dry eye. Am J
Ophthalmol 2012;153(6):1050e60. e1.
[678] Sheppard JD, Torkildsen GL, Lonsdale JD, D'Ambrosio Jr FA, McLaurin EB,
Eiferman RA, et al. Lifitegrast ophthalmic solution 5.0% for treatment of dry
eye disease: results of the OPUS-1 phase 3 study. Ophthalmology
2014;121(2):475e83.
[679] Tauber J, Karpecki P, Latkany R, Luchs J, Martel J, Sall K, et al. Lifitegrast
Ophthalmic Solution 5.0% versus Placebo for Treatment of Dry Eye Disease:
Results of the Randomized Phase III OPUS-2 Study. Ophthalmology
2015;122(12):2423e31.
[680] Donnenfeld ED, Karpecki PM, Majmudar PA, Nichols KK, Raychaudhuri A,
Roy M, et al. Safety of Lifitegrast Ophthalmic Solution 5.0% in Patients With
Dry Eye Disease: A 1-Year, Multicenter, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled
Study. Cornea 2016;35:741e8.
[681] Shine WE, McCulley JP, Pandya AG. Minocycline effect on meibomian gland
lipids in meibomianitis patients. Exp Eye Res 2003;76(4):417e20.
[682] Ta CN, Shine WE, McCulley JP, Pandya A, Trattler W, Norbury JW. Effects of
minocycline on the ocular flora of patients with acne rosacea or seborrheic
blepharitis. Cornea 2003;22(6):545e8.
[683] Dougherty JM, McCulley JP, Silvany RE, Meyer DR. The role of tetracycline in
chronic blepharitis. Inhibition of lipase production in staphylococci. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1991;32(11):2970e5.
[684] Solomon A, Rosenblatt M, Li DQ, Liu Z, Monroy D, Ji Z, et al. Doxycycline
inhibition of interleukin-1 in the corneal epithelium. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2000;41(9):2544e57.
[685] Li Y, Kuang K, Yerxa B, Wen Q, Rosskothen H, Fischbarg J. Rabbit conjunctival
epithelium transports fluid, and P2Y2(2) receptor agonists stimulate Cl(-)
and fluid secretion. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2001;281(2):C595e602.
[686] Li DQ, Luo L, Chen Z, Kim HS, Song XJ, Pflugfelder SC. JNK and ERK MAP
kinases mediate induction of IL-1beta, TNF-alpha and IL-8 following
hyperosmolar stress in human limbal epithelial cells. Exp Eye Res
2006;82(4):588e96.
[687] Zhang Z, Yang WZ, Zhu ZZ, Hu QQ, Chen YF, He H, et al. Therapeutic effects of
topical doxycycline in a benzalkonium chloride-induced mouse dry eye
model. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:2963e74.
[688] Liu Y, Kam WR, Ding J, Sullivan DA. Can tetracycline antibiotics duplicate the
ability of azithromycin to stimulate human meibomian gland epithelial cell
differentiation? Cornea 2015;34(3):342e6.
[689] Hoeprich PD, Warshauer DM. Entry of four tetracyclines into saliva and tears.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1974;5(3):330e6.
[690] Driver PJ, Lemp MA. Meibomian gland dysfunction. Surv Ophthalmol 1996
Mar-Apr;40(5):343e67.
[691] Forton F, Germaux MA, Brasseur T, De Liever A, Laporte M, Mathys C, et al.
Demodicosis and rosacea: epidemiology and significance in daily dermato￾logic practice. J Am Acad Dermatol 2005;52(1):74e87.
[692] Mc Aleer MA, Lacey N, Powell FC. The pathophysiology of rosacea. G Ital
Dermatol Venereol 2009;144(6):663e71.
[693] Lazaridou E, Giannopoulou C, Fotiadou C, Vakirlis E, Trigoni A, Ioannides D.
The potential role of microorganisms in the development of rosacea. J Dtsch
Dermatol Ges 2011;9(1):21e5.
[694] Jarmuda S, O'Reilly N, Zaba R, Jakubowicz O, Szkaradkiewicz A, Kavanagh K.
Potential role of Demodex mites and bacteria in the induction of rosacea. J
Med Microbiol 2012;61(Pt 11):1504e10.
[695] van Zuuren EJ, Fedorowicz Z. Interventions for Rosacea. JAMA 2015;314:
2403e4.
[696] van Zuuren EJ, Fedorowicz Z, Carter B, van der Linden MM, Charland L. In￾terventions for rosacea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;4:CD003262.
[697] Ding J, Kam WR, Dieckow J, Sullivan DA. The influence of 13-cis retinoic acid
on human meibomian gland epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2013;54(6):4341e50.
[698] Macdonald A, Feiwel M. Perioral dermatitis: aetiology and treatment with
tetracycline. Br J Dermatol 1972;87(4):315e9.
[699] Jansen T, Plewig G. Rosacea: classification and treatment. J R Soc Med
1997;90(3):144e50.
[700] Frucht-Pery J, Chayet AS, Feldman ST, Lin S, Brown SI. The effect of doxy￾cycline on ocular rosacea. Am J Ophthalmol 1989;107(4):434e5.
[701] Pfeffer I, Borelli C, Zierhut M, Schaller M. Treatment of ocular rosacea with 40
mg doxycycline in a slow release form. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges 2011;9(11):
904e7.
[702] Seal DV, Wright P, Ficker L, Hagan K, Troski M, Menday P. Placebo controlled
trial of fusidic acid gel and oxytetracycline for recurrent blepharitis and
rosacea. Br J Ophthalmol 1995;79(1):42e5.
[703] Ma€€
att€
a M, Kari O, Tervahartiala T, Peltonen S, Kari M, Saari M, et al. Tear fluid
levels of MMP-8 are elevated in ocular rosacea-treatment effect of oral
doxycycline. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2006;244(8):957e62.
[704] Gulbenkian A, Myers J, Fries D. Hamster flank organ hydrolase and lipase
activity. J Invest Dermatol 1980;75(4):289e92.
[705] Lindsley K, Matsumura S, Hatef E, Akpek EK. Interventions for chronic ble￾pharitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;5:CD005556.
[706] Voils SA, Evans ME, Lane MT, Schosser RH, Rapp RP. Use of macrolides and
tetracyclines for chronic inflammatory diseases. Ann Pharmacother
2005;39(1):86e94.
[707] Aronowicz JD, Shine WE, Oral D, Vargas JM, McCulley JP. Short term oral
minocycline treatment of meibomianitis. Br J Ophthalmol 2006;90(7):
856e60.
[708] Yoo SE, Lee DC, Chang MH. The effect of low-dose doxycycline therapy in
chronic meibomian gland dysfunction. Korean J Ophthalmol 2005;19(4):
258e63.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 622
[709] Seitsalo H, Niemela RK, Marinescu-Gava M, Vuotila T, Tj € €
aderhane L, Salo T.
Effectiveness of low-dose doxycycline (LDD) on clinical symptoms of
Sjogren's syndrome: a randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled cross- €
over study. J Negat Results Biomed 2007;6:11.
[710] Lee H, Min K, Kim EK, Kim TI. Minocycline Controls Clinical Outcomes and
Inflammatory Cytokines in Moderate and Severe Meibomian Gland
Dysfunction. Am J Ophthalmol 2012;154(6):949e57.
[711] Gilbard JP. The scientific context and basis of the pharmacologic manage￾ment of dry eyes. Ophthalmol Clin N Am 2005;18:475e84.
[712] Del Rosso JQ. A status report on the use of subantimicrobial-dose doxycy￾cline: a review of the biologic and antimicrobial effects of the tetracyclines.
Cutis 2004;74(2):118e22.
[713] Skidmore R, Kovach R, Walker C, Thomas J, Bradshaw M, Leyden J, et al.
Effects of subantimicrobial-dose doxycycline in the treatment of moderate
acne. Arch Dermatol 2003;139(4):459e64.
[714] Velicer CM, Heckbert SR, Lampe JW, Potter JD, Robertson CA, Taplin SH.
Antibiotic use in relation to the risk of breast cancer. JAMA 2004;291:
827e35.
[715] Velicer CM, Heckbert SR, Rutter C, Lampe JW, Malone K. Association between
antibiotic use prior to breast cancer diagnosis and breast tumour charac￾teristics (United States). Cancer Causes Control 2006;17(3):307e13.
[716] García Rodríguez LA, Gonzalez-P erez A. Use of antibiotics and risk of breast 
cancer. Am J Epidemiol 2005;161(7):616e9.
[717] Kashkouli MB, Fazel AJ, Kiavash V, Nojomi M, Ghiasian L. Oral azithromycin
versus doxycycline in meibomian gland dysfunction: a randomised double￾masked open-label clinical trial. Br J Ophthalmol 2015;99(2):199e204.
[718] Greene JB, Jeng BH, Fintelmann RE, Margolis TP. Oral azithromycin for the
treatment of meibomitis. JAMA Ophthalmol 2014;132(1):121e2.
[719] Qiao J, Yan X. Emerging treatment options for meibomian gland dysfunction.
Clin Ophthalmol 2013;7:1797e803.
[720] Igami TZ, Holzchuh R, Osaki TH, Santo RM, Kara-Jose N, Hida RY. Oral azi￾thromycin for treatment of posterior blepharitis. Cornea 2011;30(10):
1145e9.
[721] Bakar O, Demircay Z, Toker E, Cakir S. Ocular signs, symptoms and tear
function tests of papulopustular rosacea patients receiving azithromycin. J
Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2009;23(5):544e9.
[722] Fernandez-Obregon A. Oral use of azithromycin for the treatment of acne
rosacea. Arch Dermatol 2004;140(4):489e90.
[723] Bakar O, Demirçay Z, Gürbüz O. Therapeutic potential of azithromycin in
rosacea. Int J Dermatol 2004;43(2):151e4.
[724] Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ. Macrolides beyond the conventional antimicro￾bials: a class of potent immunomodulators. Int J Antimicrob Agents
2008;31(1):12e20.
[725] Labro MT. J Antimicrob Chemother 1998;41(Suppl B):37e46.
[726] Rubin BK. Immunomodulatory properties of macrolides: overview and his￾torical perspective. Am J Med 2004;117(Suppl 9A):2Se4S.
[727] Modi S, Harting M, Rosen T. Azithromycin as an alternative rosacea therapy
when tetracyclines prove problematic. J Drugs Dermatol 2008;7(9):898e9.
[728] Singhi MK, Ghiya BC, Dhabhai RK. Comparison of oral azithromycin pulse
with daily doxycycline in the treatment of acne vulgaris. Indian J Dermatol
Venereol Leprol 2003 Jul-Aug;69(4):274e6.
[729] Antonio JR, Pegas JR, Cestari TF, Do Nascimento LV. Azithromycin pulses in
the treatment of inflammatory and pustular acne: efficacy, tolerability and
safety. J Dermatol Treat 2008;19(4):210e5.
[730] Luchs J. Efficacy of topical azithromycin ophthalmic solution 1% in the
treatment of posterior blepharitis. Adv Ther 2008;25(9):858e70.
[731] Haque RM, Torkildsen GL, Brubaker K, Zink RC, Kowalski RP, Mah FS, et al.
Multicenter open-label study evaluating the efficacy of azithromycin
ophthalmic solution 1% on the signs and symptoms of subjects with ble￾pharitis. Cornea 2010;29(8):871e7.
[732] Opitz DL, Tyler KF. Efficacy of azithromycin 1% ophthalmic solution for
treatment of ocular surface disease from posterior blepharitis. Clin Exp
Optom 2011;94(2):200e6.
[733] Nichols JJ, Bickle KM, Zink RC, Schiewe MD, Haque RM, Nichols KK. Safety
and efficacy of topical azithromycin ophthalmic solution 1.0% in the treat￾ment of contact lens-related dry eye. Eye Contact Lens 2012;38(2):73e9.
[734] Fadlallah A, Rami HE, Fahd D, Dunia I, Bejjani R, Chlela E, et al. Azithromycin
1.5% ophthalmic solution: efficacy and treatment modalities in chronic
blepharitis. Arq Bras Oftalmol 2012 May-Jun;75(3):178e82.
[735] Hosseini K, Lindstrom RL, Foulks G, Nichols KK. A randomized, double￾masked, parallel-group, comparative study to evaluate the clinical efficacy
and safety of 1% azithromycin-0.1% dexamethasone combination compared
to 1% azithromycin alone, 0.1% dexamethasone alone, and vehicle in the
treatment of subjects with blepharitis. Clin Ophthalmol 2016;10:1495e503.
[736] Foulks GN, Borchman D, Yappert M, Kakar S. Topical azithromycin and oral
doxycycline therapy of meibomian gland dysfunction: a comparative clinical
and spectroscopic pilot study. Cornea 2013;32(1):44e53.
[737] Wladis EJ, Bradley EA, Bilyk JR, Yen MT, Mawn LA. Oral Antibiotics for
Meibomian Gland-Related Ocular Surface Disease: A Report by the American
Academy of Ophthalmology. Ophthalmology 2016;123(3):492e6.
[738] Kirkness CM, Adams GG, Dilly PN, Lee JP. Botulinum toxin A-induced pro￾tective ptosis in corneal disease. Ophthalmology 1988;95(4):473e80.
[739] Gossman MD, Bowe BE, Tanenbaum M. Reversible suture tarsorrhaphy for
eyelid malposition and keratopathy. Ophthalmic Surg 1991;22(4):237e9.
[740] Chhadva P, Alexander A, McClellan AL, McManus KT, Seiden B, Galor A. The
impact of conjunctivochalasis on dry eye symptoms and signs. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2015;56(5):2867e71.
[741] Uchino M, Dogru M, Yagi Y, Goto E, Tomita M, Kon T, et al. The features of dry
eye disease in a Japanese elderly population. Optom Vis Sci 2006;83(11):
797e802.
[742] Hoh H, Schirra F, Kienecker C, Ruprecht KW. Lid-parallel conjunctival folds
are a sure diagnostic sign of dry eye. Ophthalmologe 1995;92:802e8.
[743] Nemeth J, Fodor E, Lang Z, Kosina-Hagy o K, Berta A, Kom ar T, et al. Lid￾parallel conjunctival folds (LIPCOF) and dry eye: a multicentre study. Br J
Ophthalmol 2012;96(11):1380e5.
[744] Huang Y, Sheha H, Tseng SC. Conjunctivochalasis interferes with tear flow
from fornix to tear meniscus. Ophthalmology 2013;120(8):1681e7.
[745] Pult H, Riede-Pult BH. Impact of conjunctival folds on central tear meniscus
height. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56(3):1459e66.
[746] Liu D. Conjunctivochalasis, A cause of tearing and its management. Ophthal
Plast Reconstr Surg 1986;2:25e8.
[747] Petris CK, Holds JB. Medial conjunctival resection for tearing associated with
conjunctivochalasis. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 2013 Jul-Aug;29(4):304e7.
[748] Yokoi N, Inatomi T, Kinoshita S. Surgery of the conjunctiva. Dev Ophthalmol
2008;41:138e58.
[749] Nakasato S, Uemoto R, Mizuki N. Thermocautery for inferior con￾junctivochalasis. Cornea 2012;31(5):514e9.
[750] Zhang XR, Zhang ZY, Hoffman MR. Electrocoagulative surgical procedure for
treatment of conjunctivochalasis. Int Surg 2012 Jan-Mar;97(1):90e3.
[751] Otaka I, Kyu N. A new surgical technique for management of con￾junctivochalasis. Am J Ophthalmol 2000;129(3):385e7.
[752] Yang HS, Choi S. New approach for conjunctivochalasis using an argon green
laser. Cornea 2013;32(5):574e8.
[753] Price J, O'Day J. A comparative study of tear secretion in blepharospasm and
hemifacial spasm patients treated with botulinum toxin. J Clin Neuro￾ophthalmol 1993;13(1):67e71.
[754] Elston JS, Marsden CD, Grandas F, Quinn NP. The significance of ophthal￾mological symptoms in idiopathic blepharospasm. Eye (Lond) 1988;2(Pt 4):
435e9.
[755] Grandas F, Elston J, Quinn N, Marsden CD. Blepharospasm: a review of 264
patients. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr 1988;51(6):767e72.
[756] Jankovic J, Ford J. Blepharospasm and orofacial-cervical dystonia: clinical and
pharmacological findings in 100 patients. Ann Neurol 1983;13(4):402e11.
[757] Lu R, Huang R, Li K, Zhang X, Yang H, Quan Y, et al. The influence of benign
essential blepharospasm on dry eye disease and ocular inflammation. Am J
Ophthalmol 2014;157(3):591e7. e1-2.
[758] Park DI, Shin HM, Lee SY, Lew H. Tear production and drainage after botu￾linum toxin A injection in patients with essential blepharospasm. Acta
Ophthalmol 2013;91(2):e108e12.
[759] Sahlin S, Chen E, Kaugesaar T, Almqvist H, Kjellberg K, Lennerstrand G. Effect
of eyelid botulinum toxin injection on lacrimal drainage. Am J Ophthalmol
2000;129(4):481e6.
[760] Kocabeyoglu S, Sekeroglu HT, Mocan MC, Muz E, Irkec M, Sanac AS. Ocular
surface alterations in blepharospasm patients treated with botulinum toxin
A injection. Eur J Ophthalmol 2014 Nov-Dec;24(6):830e4.
[761] Horwath-Winter J, Bergloeff J, Floegel I, Haller-Schober EM, Schmut O. Bot￾ulinum toxin A treatment in patients suffering from blepharospasm and dry
eye. Br J Ophthalmol 2003;87(1):54e6.
[762] Sahlin S, Linderoth R. Eyelid botulinum toxin injections for the dry eye. Dev
Ophthalmol 2008;41:187e92.
[763] Vold SD, Carroll RP, Nelson JD. Dermatochalasis and dry eye. Am J Oph￾thalmol 1993;115(2):216e20.
[764] Floegel I, Horwath-Winter J, Muellner K, Haller-Schober EM. A conservative
blepharoplasty may be a means of alleviating dry eye symptoms. Acta
Ophthalmol Scand 2003;81(3):230e2.
[765] Moesen I, van den Bosch W, Wubbels R, Paridaens D. Is dry eye associated
with acquired aponeurogenic blepharoptosis? Orbit 2014;33(3):173e7.
[766] Bagheri A, Najmi H, Salim RE, Yazdani S. Tear condition following unilateral
ptosis surgery. Orbit 2015;34(2):66e71.
[767] Watanabe A, Kakizaki H, Selva D, Ohmae M, Yokoi N, Wakimasu K, et al.
Short-term changes in tear volume after blepharoptosis repair. Cornea
2014;33(1):14e7.
[768] Watanabe A, Selva D, Kakizaki H, Oka Y, Yokoi N, Wakimasu K, et al. Long￾term Tear Volume Changes After Blepharoptosis Surgery and Blepharoplasty.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56(1):54e8.
[769] Prischmann J, Sufyan A, Ting JY, Ruffin C, Perkins SW. Dry eye symptoms and
chemosis following blepharoplasty: a 10-year retrospective review of 892
cases in a single-surgeon series. JAMA Facial Plast Surg 2013;15:39e46.
[770] Leatherbarrow B, Saha K. Complications of blepharoplasty. Facial Plast Surg
2013;29(4):281e8.
[771] Shao Chunyi, Fu Yao, Lu Linna, Chen Junzhao, Shen Qin, Zhu Huimin, et al.
Dynamic Changes of Tear Fluid After Cosmetic Transcutaneous Lower
Blepharoplasty Measured by Optical Coherence Tomography. Am J Oph￾thalmol 2014;158(1):55e63.
[772] Pacella SJ, Codner MA. Minor complications after blepharoplasty: dry eyes,
chemosis, granulomas, ptosis, and scleral show. Plast Reconstr Surg
2010;125(2):709e18.
[773] Honavar SG, Bansal AK, Sangwan VS, Rao GN. Amniotic membrane trans￾plantation for ocular surface reconstruction in Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Ophthalmology 2000;107(5):975e9.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 623
[774] Donnenfeld ED, Perry HD, Wallerstein A, Caronia RM, Kanellopoulos AJ,
Sforza PD, et al. Subconjunctival mitomycin C for the treatment of ocular
cicatricial pemphigoid. Ophthalmology 1999;106:72e8. discussion 9.
[775] Barabino S, Rolando M, Bentivoglio G, Mingari C, Zanardi S, Bellomo R, et al.
Role of amniotic membrane transplantation for conjunctival reconstruction
in ocular-cicatricial pemphigoid. Ophthalmology 2003;110(3):474e80.
[776] Clearfield E, Muthappan V, Wang X, Kuo IC. Conjunctival autograft for pte￾rygium. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;2:CD011349.
[777] Kaufman SC, Jacobs DS, Lee WB, Deng SX, Rosenblatt MI, Shtein RM. Options
and adjuvants in surgery for pterygium: a report by the American Academy
of Ophthalmology. Ophthalmology 2013;120(1):201e8.
[778] Foster CS, Sainz De La Maza M. Ocular cicatricial pemphigoid review. Curr
Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;4(5):435e9.
[779] Shay E, Kheirkhah A, Liang L, Sheha H, Gregory DG, Tseng SC. Amniotic
membrane transplantation as a new therapy for the acute ocular manifes￾tations of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Surv
Ophthalmol 2009 Nov-Dec;54(6):686e96.
[780] Arya SK, Bhala S, Malik A, Sood S. Role of amniotic membrane trans￾plantation in ocular surface disorders. Nepal J Ophthalmol 2010 Jul-Dec;2(2):
145e53.
[781] Gregory DG. Treatment of acute Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic
epidermal necrolysis using amniotic membrane: a review of 10 consecutive
cases. Ophthalmology 2011;118(5):908e14.
[782] Cheng AM, Zhao D, Chen R, Yin HY, Tighe S, Sheha H, et al. Accelerated
Restoration of Ocular Surface Health in Dry Eye Disease by Self-Retained
Cryopreserved Amniotic Membrane. Ocul Surf 2016;14(1):56e63.
[783] Elwan MA, Ishii T, Ono F, Sakuragawa N. Evidence for the presence of
dopamine D1 receptor mRNA and binding sites in monkey amniotic
epithelial cells. Neurosci Lett 1999;262(1):9e12.
[784] Elwan MA, Thangavel R, Ono F, Sakuragawa N. Synthesis and release of
catecholamines by cultured monkey amniotic epithelial cells. J Neurosci Res
1998;53(1):107e13.
[785] Meller D, Schroder A, Steuhl KP, Theiss C. Neurotrophic Effect of Amniotic €
Membrane on Neuronal Cell Cultures: An in vitro Model to Study Underlying
Action Mechanisms of Amniotic Membrane in the Treatment of Neuro￾trophic Keratopathy. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:875.
[786] Sakuragawa N, Elwan MA, Uchida S, Fujii T, Kawashima K. Non-neuronal
neurotransmitters and neurotrophic factors in amniotic epithelial cells:
expression and function in humans and monkey. Jpn J Pharmacol
2001;85(1):20e3.
[787] Stelnicki EJ, Doolabh V, Lee S, Levis C, Baumann FG, Longaker MT, et al. Nerve
dependency in scarless fetal wound healing. Plast Reconstr Surg
2000;105(1):140e7.
[788] Ryff K, Ryff B, Lighthizer N. Insert and remove and amniotic membrane graft.
Rev Optom 2015;152:23e5.
[789] Suri K, Kosker M, Raber IM, Hammersmith KM, Nagra PK, Ayres BD, et al.
Sutureless amniotic membrane ProKera for ocular surface disorders: short￾term results. Eye Contact Lens 2013;39(5):341e7.
[790] Kolomeyer AM, Do BK, Tu Y, Chu DS. Placement of ProKera in the manage￾ment of ocular manifestations of acute Stevens-Johnson syndrome in an
outpatient. Eye Contact Lens 2013;39(3):e7e11.
[791] Kwon JW, Kim JS, Choi SB, Lee JH, Wee WR. Experimental study of an
automated system for the delivery of eyedrops using a microinfusion pump.
Am J Ophthalmol 2005;139(3):547e9.
[792] Murube J, Murube E, ChenZhuo L, Rivas L. Subcutaneous abdominal artificial
tears pump-reservoir for severe dry eye. Orbit 2003;22(1):29e40.
[793] Murube J, Geerling G. Mechanical pump dacryoreservoirs. Dev Ophthalmol
2008;41:269e82.
[794] Geerling G, Honnicke K, Schroder C, Framme C, Sieg P, Lauer I, et al. Quality of €
salivary tears following autologous submandibular gland transplantation for
severe dry eye. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2000;238(1):45e52.
[795] Murube J, Manyari A, ChenZhuo L, Rivas L, Murube I. Labial Salivary Gland
Transplantation in Severe Dry Eye. Oper Tech Oculoplast Orbital Reconstr
Surg 1998;2:104e10.
[796] Filatov V, Chevaljev V. Surgical Treatment of Parenchymatous Opthalmoxe￾rosis. J Oftalmol Odessa 1951;3:131e7.
[797] Geerling G, Sieg P. Transplantation of the major salivary glands. Dev Oph￾thalmol 2008;41:255e68.
[798] Murube-del-Castillo J. Transplantation of salivary gland to the lacrimal basin.
Scand J Rheumatol Suppl 1986;61:264e7.
[799] Qin J, Zhang L, Cai ZG, Mao C, Liu XJ, Lv L, et al. Microvascular autologous
transplantation of partial submandibular gland for severe keratoconjuncti￾vitis sicca. Br J Ophthalmol 2013;97(9):1123e8.
[800] Geerling G, Garrett JR, Paterson KL, Sieg P, Collin JR, Carpenter GH, et al.
Innervation and secretory function of transplanted human submandibular
salivary glands. Transplantation 2008;85(1):135e40.
[801] Lasudry J. Experimental approach to surgical treatment of lacrimal insuffi-
ciency by microvascular submandibular salivary gland autotransplantation.
Bull Soc Belge Ophtalmol 1992;245:45e51.
[802] Kumar PA, Macleod AM, O'Brien BM, Hickey MJ, Knight KR. Microvascular
submandibular gland transfer for the management of xerophthalmia; an
experimental study. Br J Plast Surg 1990;43(4):431e6.
[803] Murube J, Marcos MG, Javate R. Amylase in mare lacrimale in patients with
submandibular salivary gland transplantation to the lacrimal basin. Adv Exp
Med Biol 1994;350:565e70.
[804] MacLeod AM, Robbins SP. Submandibular gland transfer in the correction of
dry eye. Aust N. Z J Ophthalmol 1992;20(2):99e103.
[805] Geerling G, Sieg P, Bastian GO, Laqua H. Transplantation of the autologous
submandibular gland for most severe cases of keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Ophthalmology 1998;105(2):327e35.
[806] Paniello RC. Submandibular gland transfer for severe xerophthalmia.
Laryngoscope 2007;117(1):40e4.
[807] Borrelli M, Schroder C, Dart JK, Collin JR, Sieg P, Cree IA, et al. Long-term €
follow-up after submandibular gland transplantation in severe dry eyes
secondary to cicatrizing conjunctivitis. Am J Ophthalmol 2010;150(6):
894e904.
[808] Lauer I, Sieg P, Bahre M, Richter E. Salivary gland scintigraphy using tech- €
netium-99m-pertechnetate after autotransplantation of the submandibular
salivary gland in the correction of dry eye. Eur J Nucl Med 1998;25(2):
128e31.
[809] Jacobsen HC, Hakim SG, Trenkle T, Nitschke M, Steven P, Sieg P. Allogenic
submandibular gland transplantation following hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. J Craniomaxillofac Surg 2013;41(8):764e9.
[810] Keegan DJ, Geerling G, Lee JP, Blake G, Collin JR, Plant GT. Botulinum toxin
treatment for hyperlacrimation secondary to aberrant regenerated seventh
nerve palsy or salivary gland transplantation. Br J Ophthalmol 2002;86(1):
43e6.
[811] Cai JR, Shan XF, Cai ZG, Zhang X, Yu GY. A new treatment for epiphora
secondary to submandibular gland transplantation: transcutaneous atropine
gel. Ocul Surf 2014;12(3):221e6.
[812] Leibovitch I, Hoyama E, Limawararut V, Crompton J, Selva D. Novel technique
to control hypersecretion from a transplanted autologous submandibular
salivary gland for keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Cornea 2006;25(10):1251e3.
[813] Song B, Zhang L, Liu XJ, Ding C, Wu LL, Gan YH, et al. Proteomic analysis of
secretion from human transplanted submandibular gland replacing lacrimal
gland with severe keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Biochim Biophys Acta
2012;1824(4):550e60.
[814] Wenkel H, Rummelt V, Naumann GO. Long term results after autologous
nasal mucosal transplantation in severe mucus deficiency syndromes. Br J
Ophthalmol 2000;84(3):279e84.
[815] Kuckelkorn R, Schrage N, Redbrake C, Kottek A, Reim M. Autologous trans￾plantation of nasal mucosa after severe chemical and thermal eye burns.
Acta Ophthalmol Scand 1996;74(5):442e8.
[816] Wang Z, Shen MM, Liu XJ, Si Y, Yu GY. Characteristics of the saliva flow rates
of minor salivary glands in healthy people. Arch Oral Biol 2015;60(3):
385e92.
[817] Marinho DR, Burmann TG, Kwitko S. Labial salivary gland transplantation for
severe dry eye due to chemical burns and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 2010 May-Jun;26(3):182e4.
[818] Sant' Anna AE, Hazarbassanov RM, de Freitas D, Gomes JA. Minor salivary 
glands and labial mucous membrane graft in the treatment of severe sym￾blepharon and dry eye in patients with Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Br J
Ophthalmol 2012;96(2):234e9.
[819] Fortes MB, Diment BC, Di Felice U, Gunn AE, Kendall JL, Esmaeelpour M, et al.
Tear fluid osmolarity as a potential marker of hydration status. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 2011;43(8):1590e7.
[820] Walsh NP, Fortes MB, Esmaeelpour M. Influence of modest changes in
whole-body hydration on tear fluid osmolarity: important considerations for
dry eye disease detection. Cornea 2011;30:1517. author reply -8.
[821] Walsh NP, Fortes MB, Raymond-Barker P, Bishop C, Owen J, Tye E, et al. Is
whole-body hydration an important consideration in dry eye? Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2012;53(10):6622e7.
[822] Simopoulos AP. Omega-6/omega-3 essential fatty acids: biological effects.
World Rev Nutr Diet 2009;99:1e16.
[823] Harris W. Omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids: partners in prevention. Curr
Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2010;13(2):125e9.
[824] Calder PC. N-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and inflammation: from molec￾ular biology to the clinic. Lipids 2003;38(4):343e52.
[825] Serhan CN, Petasis NA. Resolvins and protectins in inflammation resolution.
Chem Rev 2011;111(10):5922e43.
[826] Simopoulos AP. Evolutionary aspects of diet: the omega-6/omega-3 ratio and
the brain. Mol Neurobiol 2011;44(2):203e15.
[827] Simopoulos AP. The importance of the ratio of omega-6/omega-3 essential
fatty acids. Biomed Pharmacother 2002;56(8):365e79.
[828] Endres S, Ghorbani R, Kelley VE, Georgilis K, Lonnemann G, van der Meer JW,
et al. The effect of dietary supplementation with n-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids on the synthesis of interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor by
mononuclear cells. N Engl J Med 1989;320(5):265e71.
[829] Meydani SN, Endres S, Woods MM, Goldin BR, Soo C, Morrill-Labrode A, et al.
Oral (n-3) fatty acid supplementation suppresses cytokine production and
lymphocyte proliferation: comparison between young and older women. J
Nutr 1991;121:547e55.
[830] Khan NA, Yessoufou A, Kim M, Hichami A. N-3 fatty acids modulate Th1 and
Th2 dichotomy in diabetic pregnancy and macrosomia. J Autoimmun
2006;26(4):268e77.
[831] Purasiri P, Mckechnie A, Heys SD, Eremin O. Modulation in vitro of human
natural cytotoxicity, lymphocyte proliferative response to mitogens and
cytokine production by essential fatty acids. Immunology 1997;92(2):
166e72.
[832] Zurier RB, Rossetti RG, Seiler CM, Laposata M. Human peripheral blood T
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 624
lymphocyte proliferation after activation of the T cell receptor: effects of
unsaturated fatty acids. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids
1999;60(5e6):371e5.
[833] Hampel U, Krüger M, Kunnen C, Garreis F, Willcox M, Paulsen F. In vitro
effects of docosahexaenoic and eicosapentaenoic acid on human meibomian
gland epithelial cells. Exp Eye Res 2015;140:139e48.
[834] Liu Y, Kam WR, Sullivan DA. Influence of Omega 3 and 6 Fatty Acids on
Human Meibomian Gland Epithelial Cells. Cornea 2016;35(8):1122e6.
[835] Schnebelen C, Viau S, Gregoire S, Joffre C, Creuzot-Garcher CP, Bron AM, et al. 
Nutrition for the eye: different susceptibility of the retina and the lacrimal
gland to dietary omega-6 and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid incorpo￾ration. Ophthalmic Res 2009;41(4):216e24.
[836] Viau S, Maire MA, Pasquis B, Gregoire S, Acar N, Bron AM, et al. Ef ficacy of a
2-month dietary supplementation with polyunsaturated fatty acids in dry
eye induced by scopolamine in a rat model. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Oph￾thalmol 2009;247(8):1039e50.
[837] Rashid S, Jin Y, Ecoiffier T, Barabino S, Schaumberg DA, Dana MR. Topical
omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids for treatment of dry eye. Arch Ophthalmol
2008;126(2):219e25.
[838] Li Z, Choi JH, Oh HJ, Park SH, Lee JB, Yoon KC. Effects of eye drops containing a
mixture of omega-3 essential fatty acids and hyaluronic acid on the ocular
surface in desiccating stress-induced murine dry eye. Curr Eye Res
2014;39(9):871e8.
[839] Dartt DA, Hodges RR, Li D, Shatos MA, Lashkari K, Serhan CN. Conjunctival
goblet cell secretion stimulated by leukotrienes is reduced by resolvins D1
and E1 to promote resolution of inflammation. J Immunol 2011;186(7):
4455e66.
[840] Erdinest N, Ovadia H, Kormas R, Solomon A. Anti-inflammatory effects of
resolvin-D1 on human corneal epithelial cells: in vitro study. J Inflamm
(Lond) 2014;11(1):6.
[841] Li N, He J, Schwartz CE, Gjorstrup P, Bazan HE. Resolvin E1 improves tear
production and decreases inflammation in a dry eye mouse model. J Ocul
Pharmacol Ther 2010;26(5):431e9.
[842] de Paiva Cintia S, Schwartz C Eric, Gjorstrup Per, P € flugfelder Stephen C.
Resolvin E1 (RX-10001) Reduces Corneal Epithelial Barrier Disruption and
Protects Against Goblet Cell Loss in a Murine Model of Dry Eye. Cornea
2012;31(11):1299e303.
[843] Torricelli AA, Santhanam A, Agrawal V, Wilson SE. Resolvin E1 analog RX-
10045 0.1% reduces corneal stromal haze in rabbits when applied topically
after PRK. Mol Vis 2014;20:1710e6.
[844] Cortina MS, He J, Li N, Bazan NG, Bazan HE. Neuroprotectin D1 synthesis and
corneal nerve regeneration after experimental surgery and treatment with
PEDF plus DHA. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51(2):804e10.
[845] Cortina MS, He J, Li N, Bazan NG, Bazan HE. Recovery of corneal sensitivity,
calcitonin gene-related peptide-positive nerves, and increased wound
healing induced by pigment epithelial-derived factor plus docosahexaenoic
acid after experimental surgery. Arch Ophthalmol 2012;130(1):76e83.
[846] Miljanovic B, Trivedi KA, Dana MR, Gilbard JP, Buring JE, Schaumberg DA.
Relation between dietary n-3 and n-6 fatty acids and clinically diagnosed dry
eye syndrome in women. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;82:887e93.
[847] Walter SD, Gronert K, McClellan AL, Levitt RC, Sarantopoulos KD, Galor A. u-
3 Tear Film Lipids Correlate With Clinical Measures of Dry Eye. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2016;57(6):2472e8.
[848] Sullivan BD, Cermak JM, Sullivan RM, Papas AS, Evans JE, Dana MR, et al.
Correlations between nutrient intake and the polar lipid profiles of meibo￾mian gland secretions in women with Sjogren's syndrome. Adv Exp Med Biol €
2002;506(Pt A):441e7.
[849] Macsai MS. The role of omega-3 dietary supplementation in blepharitis and
meibomian gland dysfunction (an AOS thesis). Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc
2008;106:336e56.
[850] Wojtowicz JC, Butovich I, Uchiyama E, Aronowicz J, Agee S, McCulley JP. Pilot,
prospective, randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled clinical trial of
an omega-3 supplement for dry eye. Cornea 2011;30(3):308e14.
[851] Bhargava R, Kumar P, Kumar M, Mehra N, Mishra A. A randomized controlled
trial of omega-3 fatty acids in dry eye syndrome. Int J Ophthalmol 2013;6(6):
811e6.
[852] Olenik A, Jim ~ enez-Alfaro I, Alejandre-Alba N, Mahillo-Fern andez I. A ran- 
domized, double-masked study to evaluate the effect of omega-3 fatty acids
supplementation in meibomian gland dysfunction. Clin Interv Aging 2013;8:
1133e8.
[853] Kawakita T, Kawabata F, Tsuji T, Kawashima M, Shimmura S, Tsubota K.
Effects of dietary supplementation with fish oil on dry eye syndrome sub￾jects: randomized controlled trial. Biomed Res 2013;34(5):215e20.
[854] Kangari H, Eftekhari MH, Sardari S, Hashemi H, Salamzadeh J, Ghassemi￾Broumand M, et al. Short-term consumption of oral omega-3 and dry eye
syndrome. Ophthalmology 2013;120(11):2191e6.
[855] Pinazo-Duran MD, Galbis-Estrada C, Pons-V azquez S, Cantú-Dibildox J, 
Marco-Ramírez C, Benítez-del-Castillo J. Effects of a nutraceutical formula￾tion based on the combination of antioxidants and u-3 essential fatty acids
in the expression of inflammation and immune response mediators in tears
from patients with dry eye disorders. Clin Interv Aging 2013;8:139e48.
[856] Olenik A. Effectiveness and tolerability of dietary supplementation with a ~
combination of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and antioxidants in the
treatment of dry eye symptoms: results of a prospective study. Clin Oph￾thalmol 2014;8:169e76.
[857] Bhargava R, Kumar P, Arora Y. Short-Term Omega 3 Fatty Acids Treatment
for Dry Eye in Young and Middle-Aged Visual Display Terminal Users. Eye
Contact Lens 2016;42(4):231e6.
[858] Deinema LA, Vingrys AJ, Wong CY, Jackson DC, Chinnery HR, Downie LE. A
Randomized, Double-Masked, Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial of Two Forms
of Omega-3 Supplements for Treating Dry Eye Disease. Ophthalmology
2017;124(1):43e52.
[859] Epitropoulos AT, Donnenfeld ED, Shah ZA, Holland EJ, Gross M, Faulkner WJ,
et al. Effect of Oral Re-esterified Omega-3 Nutritional Supplementation on
Dry Eyes. Cornea 2016;35(9):1185e91.
[860] Chinnery HR, Naranjo Golborne C, Downie LE. Omega-3 supplementation is
neuroprotective to corneal nerves in dry eye disease: a pilot study.
Ophthalmic Physiol Opt. 2017 Jul;37(4):473e81.
[861] Liu A, Ji J. Omega-3 essential fatty acids therapy for dry eye syndrome: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled studies. Med Sci Monit 2014;20:
1583e9.
[862] Buckley MS, Goff AD, Knapp WE. Fish oil interaction with warfarin. Ann
Pharmacother 2004;38(1):50e2.
[863] Roncone M, Bartlett H, Eperjesi F. Essential fatty acids for dry eye: A review.
Cont Lens Anter Eye 2010;33:49e54. quiz 100.
[864] Brasky TM, Darke AK, Song X, Tangen CM, Goodman PJ, Thompson IM, et al.
Plasma phospholipid fatty acids and prostate cancer risk in the SELECT trial. J
Natl Cancer Inst 2013;105(15):1132e41.
[865] Brenna JT, Burdge GC, Crawford MA, Clayton P, Cunnane SC, Gow R, et al. RE:
Plasma phospholipid fatty acids and prostate cancer risk in the SELECT trial. J
Natl Cancer Inst 2014;106:dju015.
[866] Szymanski KM, Wheeler DC, Mucci LA. Fish consumption and prostate cancer
risk: a review and meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2010;92(5):1223e33.
[867] Manthorpe R, Hagen Petersen S, Prause JU. Primary Sjogren's syndrome €
treated with Efamol/Efavit. A double-blind cross-over investigation. Rheu￾matol Int 1984;4(4):165e7.
[868] Oxholm P, Manthorpe R, Prause JU, Horrobin D. Patients with primary
Sjogren's syndrome treated for two months with evening primrose oil. Scand €
J Rheumatol 1986;15(2):103e8.
[869] Theander E, Horrobin DF, Jacobsson LT, Manthorpe R. Gammalinolenic acid
treatment of fatigue associated with primary Sjogren's syndrome. Scand J €
Rheumatol 2002;31(2):72e9.
[870] Aragona P, Bucolo C, Spinella R, Giuffrida S, Ferreri G. Systemic omega-6
essential fatty acid treatment and pge1 tear content in Sjogren's syndrome €
patients. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46(12):4474e9.
[871] Pinna A, Piccinini P, Carta F. Effect of oral linoleic and gamma-linolenic acid
on meibomian gland dysfunction. Cornea 2007;26(3):260e4.
[872] Creuzot C, Passemard M, Viau S, Joffre C, Pouliquen P, Elena PP, et al.
Improvement of dry eye symptoms with polyunsaturated fatty acids. J Fr
Ophtalmol 2006;29:868e73.
[873] Larmo PS, Jarvinen RL, Set € al € €
a NL, Yang B, Viitanen MH, Engblom JR, et al. Oral
sea buckthorn oil attenuates tear film osmolarity and symptoms in in￾dividuals with dry eye. J Nutr 2010;140(8):1462e8.
[874] Brignole-Baudouin F, Baudouin C, Aragona P, Rolando M, Labetoulle M,
Pisella PJ, et al. A multicentre, double-masked, randomized, controlled trial
assessing the effect of oral supplementation of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty
acids on a conjunctival inflammatory marker in dry eye patients. Acta
Ophthalmol 2011;89(7):e591e7.
[875] Jackson MA, Burrell K, Gaddie IB, Richardson SD. Efficacy of a new pre￾scription-only medical food supplement in alleviating signs and symptoms
of dry eye, with or without concomitant cyclosporine A. Clin Ophthalmol
2011;5:1201e6.
[876] Creuzot-Garcher C, Baudouin C, Labetoulle M, Pisella PJ, Mouriaux F, Med￾deb-Ouertani A, et al. Efficacy assessment of Nutrilarm(R), a per os omega-3
and omega-6 polyunsaturated essential fatty acid dietary formulation versus
placebo in patients with bilateral treated moderate dry eye syndrome. J Fr
Ophtalmol 2011;34:448e55.
[877] Sheppard Jr JD, Singh R, McClellan AJ, Weikert MP, Scoper SV, Joly TJ, et al.
Long-term Supplementation With n-6 and n-3 PUFAs Improves Moderate￾to-Severe Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca: A Randomized Double-Blind Clinical
Trial. Cornea 2013;32(10):1297e304.
[878] Zhu W, Wu Y, Li G, Wang J, Li X. Efficacy of polyunsaturated fatty acids for
dry eye syndrome: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Nutr Rev
2014;72(10):662e71.
[879] Ng SM, Lindsley K, Akpek EK. Omega-3 and omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty
acids for dry eye syndrome (Protocol). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;3:
CD011016.
[880] Ren J, Mozurkewich EL, Sen A, Vahratian AM, Ferreri TG, Morse AN, et al.
Total Serum Fatty Acid Analysis by GC-MS: Assay Validation and Serum
Sample Stability. Curr Pharm Anal 2013;9(4):331e9.
[881] Danjo Y, Lee M, Horimoto K, Hamano T. Ocular surface damage and tear
lactoferrin in dry eye syndrome. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1994;72(4):
433e7.
[882] Boukes RJ, Boonstra A, Breebaart AC, Reits D, Glasius E, Luyendyk L, et al.
Analysis of human tear protein profiles using high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC). Doc Ophthalmol 1987 Sep-Oct;67(1e2):105e13.
[883] Seal DV. The effect of ageing and disease on tear constituents. Trans Oph￾thalmol Soc U K 1985;104(Pt 4):355e62.
[884] Mackie IA, Seal DV. Diagnostic implications of tear protein profiles. Br J
Ophthalmol 1984;68(5):321e4.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 625
[885] Goren MB, Goren SB. Diagnostic tests in patients with symptoms of kera￾toconjunctivitis sicca. Am J Ophthalmol 1988;106(5):570e4.
[886] Versura P, Nanni P, Bavelloni A, Blalock WL, Piazzi M, Roda A, et al. Tear
proteomics in evaporative dry eye disease. Eye (Lond) 2010;24(8):
1396e402.
[887] Kawashima M, Kawakita T, Inaba T, Okada N, Ito M, Shimmura S, et al. Di￾etary lactoferrin alleviates age-related lacrimal gland dysfunction in mice.
PLoS One 2012;7:e33148.
[888] Dogru M, Matsumoto Y, Yamamoto Y, Goto E, Saiki M, Shimazaki J, et al.
Lactoferrin in Sjogren's syndrome. Ophthalmology 2007;114(12):2366 € e7.
[889] Devendra J, Singh S. Effect of Oral Lactoferrin on Cataract Surgery Induced
Dry Eye: A Randomised Controlled Trial. J Clin Diagn Res 2015;9(10):
NC06e9.
[890] Dogru M, Wakamatsu T, Kojima T, Matsumoto Y, Kawakita T, Schnider C,
et al. The role of oxidative stress and inflammation in dry eye disease. Cornea
2009;28(supp1). S70eS4.
[891] Blades KJ, Patel S, Aidoo KE. Oral antioxidant therapy for marginal dry eye.
Eur J Clin Nutr 2001;55(7):589e97.
[892] Drouault-Holowacz S, Bieuvelet S, Burckel A, Rigal D, Dubray C, Lichon JL,
et al. Antioxidants intake and dry eye syndrome: a crossover, placebo￾controlled, randomized trial. Eur J Ophthalmol 2009 May-Jun;19(3):337e42.
[893] Hitoe S, Tanaka J, Shimoda H. MaquiBright standardized maqui berry extract
significantly increases tear fluid production and ameliorates dry eye-related
symptoms in a clinical pilot trial. Panminerva Med 2014;56:1e6.
[894] Cakatay U. Pro-oxidant actions of alpha-lipoic acid and dihydrolipoic acid.
Med Hypotheses 2006;66(1):110e7.
[895] Andrade AS, Salomon TB, Behling CS, Mahl CD, Hackenhaar FS, Putti J, et al.
Alpha-lipoic acid restores tear production in an animal model of dry eye. Exp
Eye Res 2014;120:1e9.
[896] Kawashima M, Tsubota K. Effect of calorie restriction on change in lacrimal
gland with age. Cornea 2011;30(Suppl 1):S29e33.
[897] Kawashima M, Nakamura S, Izuta Y, Inoue S, Tsubota K. Dietary Supple￾mentation with a Combination of Lactoferrin, Fish Oil, and Enterococcus
faecium WB2000 for Treating Dry Eye: A Rat Model and Human Clinical
Study. Ocul Surf 2016;14(2):255e63.
[898] Ho KC, Jalbert I, Watt K, Golebiowski BA. Possible Association Between Dry
Eye Symptoms and Body Fat: A Prospective, Cross-Sectional Preliminary
Study. Eye Contact Lens 2017. In press.
[899] Kim JH, Kim JH, Nam WH, Yi K, Choi DG, Hyon JY, et al. Oral alcohol
administration disturbs tear film and ocular surface. Ophthalmology
2012;119(5):965e71.
[900] Choi W, Kim JC, Kim WS, Oh HJ, Yang JM, Lee JB, et al. Clinical Effect of
Antioxidant Glasses Containing Extracts of Medicinal Plants in Patients with
Dry Eye Disease: A Multi-Center, Prospective, Randomized, Double-Blind,
Placebo-Controlled Trial. PLoS One 2015;10:e0139761.
[901] Pisella PJ, Pouliquen P, Baudouin C. Prevalence of ocular symptoms and signs
with preserved and preservative free glaucoma medication. Br J Ophthalmol
2002;86(4):418e23.
[902] Jaenen N, Baudouin C, Pouliquen P, Manni G, Figueiredo A, Zeyen T. Ocular
symptoms and signs with preserved and preservative-free glaucoma medi￾cations. Eur J Ophthalmol 2007 May-Jun;17(3):341e9.
[903] Leung EW, Medeiros FA, Weinreb RN. Prevalence of ocular surface disease in
glaucoma patients. J Glaucoma 2008;17(5):350e5.
[904] Erb C, Gast U, Schremmer D. German register for glaucoma patients with dry
eye. I. Basic outcome with respect to dry eye. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Oph￾thalmol 2008;246(11):1593e601.
[905] Fechtner RD, Godfrey DG, Budenz D, Stewart JA, Stewart WC, Jasek MC.
Prevalence of ocular surface complaints in patients with glaucoma using
topical intraocular pressure-lowering medications. Cornea 2010;29(6):
618e21.
[906] Rossi GC, Pasinetti GM, Scudeller L, Raimondi M, Lanteri S, Bianchi PE. Risk
factors to develop ocular surface disease
in treated glaucoma or ocular hypertension patients. Eur J Ophthalmol 2013
May-Jun;23(3):296e302.
[907] Chen HY, Lin CL, Tsai YY, Kao CH. Association between Glaucoma Medication
Usage and Dry Eye in Taiwan. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92(9):e227e32.
[908] Iester M, Telani S, Frezzotti P, Motolese I, Figus M, Fogagnolo P, et al. Ocular
surface changes in glaucomatous patients treated with and without pre￾servatives beta-blockers. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2014;30(6):476e81.
[909] Ciancaglini M, Carpineto P, Agnifili L, Nubile M, Fasanella V, Lanzini M, et al.
An in vivo confocal microscopy and impression cytology analysis of pre￾served and unpreserved levobunolol-induced conjunctival changes. Eur J
Ophthalmol 2008;18:400e7.
[910] Renieri G, Führer K, Scheithe K, Lorenz K, Pfeiffer N, Thieme H. Efficacy and
tolerability of preservative-free eye drops containing a fixed combination of
dorzolamide and timolol in glaucoma patients. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther
2010;26(6):597e603.
[911] Uusitalo H, Chen E, Pfeiffer N, Brignole-Baudouin F, Kaarniranta K, Leino M,
et al. Switching from a preserved to a preservative-free prostaglandin
preparation in topical glaucoma medication. Acta Ophthalmol 2010;88(3):
329e36.
[912] Freeman P David, Kahook Malik Y. Preservatives in topical ophthalmic
medications: historical and clinical perspectives. Expert Rev Ophthalmol
2009;4(1):59e64.
[913] Labbe A, Pauly A, Liang H, Brignole-Baudouin F, Martin C, Warnet JM, et al. 
Comparison of toxicological profiles of benzalkonium chloride and poly￾quaternium-1: an experimental study. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2006;22(4):
267e78.
[914] Henry JC, Peace JH, Stewart JA, Stewart WC. Efficacy, safety, and improved
tolerability of travoprost BAK-free ophthalmic solution compared with prior
prostaglandin therapy. Clin Ophthalmol 2008;2(3):613e21.
[915] Katz G, Springs CL, Craven ER, Montecchi-Palmer M. Ocular surface disease in
patients with glaucoma or ocular hypertension treated with either BAK￾preserved latanoprost or BAK-free travoprost. Clin Ophthalmol 2010;4:
1253e61.
[916] Aihara M, Oshima H, Araie M, group EXs. Effects of SofZia-preserved trav￾oprost and benzalkonium chloride-preserved latanoprost on the ocular
surface e a multicentre randomized single-masked study. Acta Ophthalmol
2013;91:e7e14.
[917] Wong J, Lan W, Ong LM, Tong L. Non-hormonal systemic medications and
dry eye. Ocul Surf 2011;9(4):212e26.
[918] Yokoi N, Bron AJ, Georgiev GA. The precorneal tear film as a fluid shell: the
effect of blinking and saccades on tear film distribution and dynamics. Ocul
Surf 2014;12(4):252e66.
[919] Tsubota K, Nakamori K. Dry eyes and video display terminals. N Engl J Med
1993;328(8):584.
[920] Tsubota K, Nakamori K. Effects of ocular surface area and blink rate on tear
dynamics. Arch Ophthalmol 1995;113(2):155e8.
[921] Uchino M, Yokoi N, Uchino Y, Dogru M, Kawashima M, Komuro A, et al.
Prevalence of dry eye disease and its risk factors in visual display terminal
users: the Osaka study. Am J Ophthalmol 2013;156(4):759e66.
[922] Stapleton F, Alves M, Bunya VY, Jalbert I, Lekhanont K, Malet F, et al. TFOS
DEWS II Epidemiology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:334e65.
[923] Uchino M, Schaumberg DA, Dogru M, Uchino Y, Fukagawa K, Shimmura S,
et al. Prevalence of dry eye disease among Japanese visual display terminal
users. Ophthalmology 2008;115(11):1982e8.
[924] Fenga C, Aragona P, Cacciola A, Spinella R, Di Nola C, Ferreri F, et al. Mei￾bomian gland dysfunction and ocular discomfort in video display terminal
workers. Eye (Lond) 2008;22(1):91e5.
[925] Wu H, Wang Y, Dong N, Yang F, Lin Z, Shang X, et al. Meibomian gland
dysfunction determines the severity of the dry eye conditions in visual
display terminal workers. PLoS One 2014;9:e105575.
[926] Uchino Y, Uchino M, Yokoi N, Dogru M, Kawashima M, Okada N, et al.
Alteration of tear mucin 5AC in office workers using visual display terminals:
The Osaka Study. JAMA Ophthalmol 2014;132(8):985e92.
[927] Nakamura S, Shibuya M, Nakashima H, Hisamura R, Masuda N, Imagawa T,
et al. Involvement of oxidative stress on corneal epithelial alterations in a
blink-suppressed dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48:1552e8.
[928] Miura DL, Hazarbassanov RM, Yamasato CK, Bandeira e Silva F, Godinho CJ,
Gomes JA. Effect of a light-emitting timer device on the blink rate of non-dry 
eye individuals and dry eye patients. Br J Ophthalmol 2013;97(8):965e7.
[929] Cardona G, Gomez M, Quevedo L, Gispets J. Effects of transient blur and VDT 
screen luminance changes on eyeblink rate. Cont Lens Anter Eye 2014;37(5):
363e7.
[930] Blehm C, Vishnu S, Khattak A, Mitra S, Yee RW. Computer vision syndrome: a
review. Surv Ophthalmol 2005 May-Jun;50(3):253e62.
[931] McCulley JP, Uchiyama E, Aronowicz JD, Butovich IA. Impact of evaporation
on aqueous tear loss. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 2006;104:121e8.
[932] Abusharha AA, Pearce EI. The effect of low humidity on the human tear film.
Cornea 2013;32(4):429e34.
[933] Alex A, Edwards A, Hays JD, Kerkstra M, Shih A, de Paiva CS, et al. Factors
predicting the ocular surface response to desiccating environmental stress.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:3325e32.
[934] Lopez-Miguel A, Tes on M, Martín-Monta nez V, Enríquez-de-Salamanca A, ~
Stern ME, Calonge M, et al. Dry eye exacerbation in patients exposed to
desiccating stress under controlled environmental conditions. Am J Oph￾thalmol 2014;157(4):788e98. e2.
[935] Lopez-Miguel A, Teson M, Martin-Montanez V, Enriquez-de-Salamanca A,
Stern ME, Gonzalez-Garcia MJ, et al. Clinical and Molecular Inflammatory
Response in Sjogren Syndrome-Associated Dry Eye Patients Under Desic￾cating Stress. Am J Ophthalmol 2016;161. 133-41 e1e2.
[936] Oh HJ, Li Z, Park SH, Yoon KC. Effect of hypotonic 0.18% sodium hyaluronate
eyedrops on inflammation of the ocular surface in experimental dry eye. J
Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2014;30(7):533e42.
[937] Hill-Bator A, Misiuk-Hojło M, Marycz K, Grzesiak J. Trehalose-based eye
drops preserve viability and functionality of cultured human corneal
epithelial cells during desiccation. Biomed Res Int 2014;2014:292139.
[938] Moore QL, De Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC. Effects of Dry Eye Therapies on
Environmentally Induced Ocular Surface Disease. Am J Ophthalmol
2015;160(1):135e42. e1.
[939] Dohlman TH, Chauhan SK, Kodati S, Hua J, Chen Y, Omoto M, et al. The CCR6/
CCL20 axis mediates Th17 cell migration to the ocular surface in dry eye
disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54(6):4081e91.
[940] Goyal S, Chauhan SK, Zhang Q, Dana R. Amelioration of murine dry eye
disease by topical antagonist to chemokine receptor 2. Arch Ophthalmol
2009;127(7):882e7.
[941] Urashima Hiroki, Takeji Yasuhiro, Okamoto Takashi, Fujisawa Shigeki,
Shinohara Hisashi. Rebamipide Increases Mucin-Like Substance Contents
and Periodic Acid Schiff Reagent-Positive Cells Density in Normal Rabbits. J
Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2012;28(3):264e70.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 626
[942] Nakamura S, Shibuya M, Nakashima H, Imagawa T, Uehara M, Tsubota K. D￾beta-hydroxybutyrate protects against corneal epithelial disorders in a rat
dry eye model with jogging board. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:
2379e87.
[943] Hirayama M, Murat D, Liu Y, Kojima T, Kawakita T, Tsubota K. Efficacy of a
novel moist cool air device in office workers with dry eye disease. Acta
Ophthalmol 2013;91(8):756e62.
[944] Willis RM, Folberg R, Krachmer JH, Holland EJ. The treatment of aqueous￾deficient dry eye with removable punctal plugs. A clinical and impression￾cytologic study. Ophthalmology 1987;94(5):514e8.
[945] Tsubota K, Yamada M, Urayama K. Spectacle side panels and moist inserts for
the treatment of dry-eye patients. Cornea 1994;13(3):197e201.
[946] Yee RW, Sperling HG, Kattek A, Paukert MT, Dawson K, Garcia M, et al.
Isolation of the ocular surface to treat dysfunctional tear syndrome associ￾ated with computer use. Ocul Surf 2007;5(4):308e15.
[947] Wakamatsu TH, Dogru M, Tsubota K. Tearful relations: oxidative stress,
inflammation and eye diseases. Arq Bras Oftalmol 2008 Nov-Dec;71(6
Suppl):72e9.
[948] Satici A, Bitiren M, Ozardali I, Vural H, Kilic A, Guzey M. The effects of chronic
smoking on the ocular surface and tear characteristics: a clinical, histological
and biochemical study. Acta Ophthalmol Scand 2003;81(6):583e7.
[949] Altinors DD, Akça S, Akova YA, Bilezikçi B, Goto E, Dogru M, et al. Smoking
associated with damage to the lipid layer of the ocular surface. Am J Oph￾thalmol 2006;141(6):1016e21.
[950] Thomas J, Jacob GP, Abraham L, Noushad B. The effect of smoking on the
ocular surface and the precorneal tear film. Australas Med J 2012;5(4):
221e6.
[951] Matsumoto Y, Dogru M, Goto E, Sasaki Y, Inoue H, Saito I, et al. Alterations of
the tear film and ocular surface health in chronic smokers. Eye (Lond)
2008;22(7):961e8.
[952] Rummenie VT, Matsumoto Y, Dogru M, Wang Y, Hu Y, Ward SK, et al. Tear
cytokine and ocular surface alterations following brief passive cigarette
smoke exposure. Cytokine 2008;43(2):200e8.
[953] Jones L, Brennan NA, Gonzalez-M eijome J, Lally J, Maldonado-Codina C, 
Schmidt TA, et al. The TFOS International Workshop on Contact Lens
Discomfort: report of the contact lens materials, design, and care subcom￾mittee. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54(11):TFOS37e70.
[954] Efron N, Jones L, Bron AJ, Knop E, Arita R, Barabino S, et al. The TFOS Inter￾national Workshop on Contact Lens Discomfort: report of the contact lens
interactions with the ocular surface and adnexa subcommittee. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:TFOS98e122.
[955] Zhou WY, Li YH. A survey on treatment of dry eye by traditional chinese
medicine and integrative chinese and Western medicine. Chin J Integr Med
2006;12(2):154e9.
[956] Wu GL, Pu XH, Li TY, Yu GY, Lu WW, Fan YS. Effect of yangyin yiqi huoxue
recipe on immune balance of Th1/Th2 in serum and submaxillary glands of
NOD mice with Sjogren's syndrome. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi
2013;33:1653e7.
[957] Wu X, Ren C, Zhou H, Zhang L, Juan C, Yang Y. Therapeutic effect of Zeng Ye
decoction on primary Sjogren's syndrome via upregulation of aquaporin1 €
and aquaporin5 expression levels. Mol Med Rep 2014;10(1):429e34.
[958] Luo H, Li X, Liu J, Andrew F, George L. Chinese Herbal Medicine in Treating
Primary Sjogren's Syndrome: A Systematic Review of Randomized Trials. €
Evid Based Complement Altern Med 2012;2012:640658.
[959] Chang YH, Lin HJ, Li WC. Clinical evaluation of the traditional chinese pre￾scription Chi-Ju-Di-Huang-Wan for dry eye. Phytother Res 2005;19(4):
349e54.
[960] Hu W, Qian X, Guo F, Zhang M, Lyu C, Tao J, et al. Traditional Chinese
medicine compound ShengJinRunZaoYangXue granules for treatment of
primary Sjogren's syndrome: a randomized, double-blind, placebo- €
controlled clinical trial. Chin Med J 2014;127(15):2721e6.
[961] Boukraa L. Additive activity of royal jelly and honey against Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Altern Med Rev 2008;13(4):330e3.
[962] Tartakovskaia AI. Apilak (royal jelly) in the therapy of trophic disorders of
the cornea in eye burns. Vestn Oftalmol 1966;79:59e61.
[963] Hussein SZ, Yusoff KM, Makpol S, Yusof YA. Antioxidant capacities and total
phenolic contents increase with gamma irradiation in two types of Malay￾sian honey. Molecules 2011;16(8):6378e95.
[964] Lusby PE, Coombes AL, Wilkinson JM. Bactericidal activity of different honeys
against pathogenic bacteria. Arch Med Res 2005 Sep-Oct;36(5):464e7.
[965] Imada T, Nakamura S, Kitamura N, Shibuya I, Tsubota K. Oral administration
of royal jelly restores tear secretion capacity in rat blink-suppressed dry eye
model by modulating lacrimal gland function. PLoS One 2014;9:e106338.
[966] Albietz JM, Lenton LM. Effect of antibacterial honey on the ocular flora in tear
deficiency and meibomian gland disease. Cornea 2006;25(9):1012e9.
[967] Craig JP, Rupenthal ID, Seyfoddin A, Cheung IM, Uy B, Wang MT, et al.
Pre-clinical development of MGO Manuka Honey microemulsion for
blephar-itis management. BMJ Open Ophth 2017;0:e000065.
[968] Craig JP, Wang MT, Ganesalingam K, Rupenthal ID, Swift S, Loh CS, et al.
Randomised masked trial of the clinical safety and tolerability of MGO
Manuka Honey eye cream for the management of blepharitis. BMJ Open
Ophth 2017;0:e000066.
[969] Ajite KO, Fadamiro OC. Prevalence of harmful/traditional medication use in
traumatic eye injury. Glob J Health Sci 2013;5(4):55e9.
[970] Prajna NV, Pillai MR, Manimegalai TK, Srinivasan M. Use of Traditional Eye
Medicines by corneal ulcer patients presenting to a hospital in South India.
Indian J Ophthalmol 1999;47(1):15e8.
[971] Verd S. Switch from antibiotic eye drops to instillation of mother's milk
drops as a treatment of infant epiphora. J Trop Pediatr 2007;53(1):68e9.
[972] Ghaemi S, Navaei P, Rahimirad S, Behjati M, Kelishadi R. Evaluation of pre￾ventive effects of colostrum against neonatal conjunctivitis: A randomized
clinical trial. J Educ Health Promot 2014;3:63.
[973] Singh M, Sugathan PS, Bhujwala RA. Human colostrum for prophylaxis
against sticky eyes and conjunctivitis in the newborn. J Trop Pediatr
1982;28(1):35e7.
[974] Baynham JT, Moorman MA, Donnellan C, Cevallos V, Keenan JD. Antibacterial
effect of human milk for common causes of paediatric conjunctivitis. Br J
Ophthalmol 2013;97(3):377e9.
[975] Ibhanesebhor SE, Otobo ES. In vitro activity of human milk against the
causative organisms of ophthalmia neonatorum in Benin City, Nigeria. J Trop
Pediatr 1996;42(6):327e9.
[976] Chaumeil C, Liotet S, Kogbe O. Treatment of severe eye dryness and prob￾lematic eye lesions with enriched bovine colostrum lactoserum. Adv Exp
Med Biol 1994;350:595e9.
[977] Bucolo C, Musumeci M, Salomone S, Romano GL, Leggio GM, Gagliano C, et al.
Effects of Topical Fucosyl-Lactose, a Milk Oligosaccharide, on Dry Eye Model:
An Example of Nutraceutical Candidate. Front Pharmacol 2015;6:280.
[978] Cheng KJ. Neurobiological mechanisms of acupuncture for some common
illnesses: a clinician's perspective. J Acupunct Meridian Stud 2014;7(3):
105e14.
[979] Lan W, Tong L. Acupuncture has effect on increasing tear break-up time:
acupuncture for treating dry eye, a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Acta
Ophthalmol 2012;90:e73.
[980] Kim TH, Kang JW, Kim KH, Kang KW, Shin MS, Jung SY, et al. Acupuncture for
the treatment of dry eye: a multicenter randomised controlled trial with active
comparison intervention (artificial teardrops). PLoS One 2012;7:e36638.
[981] Gong L, Sun X, Chapin WJ. Clinical curative effect of acupuncture therapy on
xerophthalmia. Am J Chin Med 2010;38(4):651e9.
[982] Yang L, Yang Z, Yu H, Song H. Acupuncture therapy is more effective than
artificial tears for dry eye syndrome: evidence based on a meta-analysis. Evid
Based Complement Altern Med 2015;2015:143858.
[983] Lin T, Gong L, Liu X, Ma X. Fourier-domain optical coherence tomography for
monitoring the lower tear meniscus in dry eye after acupuncture treatment.
Evid Based Complement Altern Med 2015;2015:492150.
[984] Nepp J, Wedrich A, Akramian J, Derbolav A, Mudrich C, Ries E, et al. Dry eye
treatment with acupuncture. A prospective, randomized, double-masked
study. Adv Exp Med Biol 1998;438:1011e6.
[985] Tseng KL, Liu HJ, Tso KY, Woung LC, Su YC, Lin JG. A clinical study of
acupuncture and SSP (silver spike point) electro-therapy for dry eye syn￾drome. Am J Chin Med 2006;34(2):197e206.
[986] Shin MS, Kim JI, Lee MS, Kim KH, Choi JY, Kang KW, et al. Acupuncture for
treating dry eye: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Acta Ophthalmol
2010;88(8):e328e33.
[987] Na KS, Han K, Park YG, Na C, Joo CK. Depression, Stress, Quality of Life, and
Dry Eye Disease in Korean Women: A Population-Based Study. Cornea
2015;34(7):733e8.
[988] Kim KW, Han SB, Han ER, Woo SJ, Lee JJ, Yoon JC, et al. Association between
depression and dry eye disease in an elderly population. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2011;52:7954e8.
[989] Li M, Gong L, Sun X, Chapin WJ. Anxiety and depression in patients with dry
eye syndrome. Curr Eye Res 2011;36(1):1e7.
[990] Ayaki M, Kawashima M, Negishi K, Tsubota K. High prevalence of sleep and
mood disorders in dry eye patients: survey of 1,000 eye clinic visitors.
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 2015;11:889e94.
[991] DeGargino J. Children's Health and the Environment: A Global Perspective.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2004.
[992] Seligman ME, Steen TA, Park N, Peterson C. Positive psychology progress:
empirical validation of interventions. Am Psychol 2005 Jul-Aug;60(5):
410e21.
[993] Kawashima M, Uchino M, Yokoi N, Uchino Y, Dogru M, Komuro A, et al.
Associations between subjective happiness and dry eye disease: a new
perspective from the Osaka study. PLoS One 2015;10:e0123299.
[994] Kawashima M, Uchino M, Yokoi N, Uchino Y, Dogru M, Komuro A, et al. The
Association between Dry Eye Disease and Physical Activity as well as
Sedentary Behavior: Results from the Osaka Study. J Ophthalmol 2014;2014:
943786.
[995] Sano K, Kawashima M, Ito A, Inaba T, Morimoto K, Watanabe M, et al. Aerobic
exercise increases tear secretion in type 2 diabetic mice. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2014;55(7):4287e94.
[996] Begley CG, Chalmers RL, Abetz L, Venkataraman K, Mertzanis P, Caffery BA,
et al. The relationship between habitual patient-reported symptoms and
clinical signs among patients with dry eye of varying severity. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2003;44(11):4753e61.
[997] Schein OD, Tielsch JM, Munoz B, Bandeen-Roche K, West S. Relation between ~
signs and symptoms of dry eye in the elderly. A population-based
perspective. Ophthalmology 1997;104(9):1395e401.
[998] Nichols KK, Nichols JJ, Mitchell GL. The lack of association between signs and
symptoms in patients with dry eye disease. Cornea 2004;23(8):762e70.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 627
[999] Savini G, Prabhawasat P, Kojima T, Grueterich M, Espana E, Goto E. The
challenge of dry eye diagnosis. Clin Ophthalmol 2008;2(1):31e55.
[1000] Adatia FA, Michaeli-Cohen A, Naor J, Caffery B, Bookman A, Slomovic A.
Correlation between corneal sensitivity, subjective dry eye symptoms and
corneal staining in Sjogren's syndrome. Can J Ophthalmol 2004;39(7): €
767e71.
[1001] Bourcier T, Acosta MC, Borderie V, Borras F, Gallar J, Bury T, et al. Decreased
corneal sensitivity in patients with dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2005;46(7):2341e5.
[1002] Baudouin C, Aragona P, Van Setten G, Rolando M, Irkeç M, Benítez del
Castillo J, et al. Diagnosing the severity of dry eye: a clear and practical
algorithm. Br J Ophthalmol 2014;98(9):1168e76.
L. Jones et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 575e628 628
