TFOS DEWS II pathophysiology report
Anthony J. Bron, FRCOphth, FMedSci a, b, 1, *
, Cintia S. de Paiva, MD, PhD c, 1
,
Sunil K. Chauhan, DVM, PhD d, 1
, Stefano Bonini, MD e
, Eric E. Gabison, MD f
,
Sandeep Jain, MD g
, Erich Knop, MD, PhD h
, Maria Markoulli, PhD, MOptom i
,
Yoko Ogawa, MD j
, Victor Perez, MD k
, Yuichi Uchino, MD, PhD j
,
Norihiko Yokoi, MD, PhD l
, Driss Zoukhri, PhD m, David A. Sullivan, PhD d
a Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK b Vision and Eye Research Unit, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK
c Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
d Schepens Eye Research Institute & Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA e Department of Ophthalmology, University Campus Biomedico, Rome, Italy
f Department of Ophthalmology, Fondation Ophtalmologique Rothschild & Hopital Bichat Claude Bernard, Paris, France ^
g Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
h Departments of Cell and Neurobiology and Ocular Surface Center Berlin, Charite e Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany €
i School of Optometry and Vision Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
j Department of Ophthalmology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
k Department of Ophthalmology, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
l Department of Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan
m Tufts University School of Dental Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
article info
Article history:
Received 26 May 2017
Accepted 26 May 2017
Keywords:
TFOS
DEWS II
Dry eye workshop
Dry eye disease
Pathophysiology
Glycocalyx
Hyperosmolarity
Inflammation
Vicious circle
abstract
The TFOS DEWS II Pathophysiology Subcommittee reviewed the mechanisms involved in the initiation and
perpetuation of dry eye disease. Its central mechanism is evaporative water loss leading to hyperosmolar
tissue damage. Research in human disease and in animal models has shown that this, either directly or by
inducing inflammation, causes a loss of both epithelial and goblet cells. The consequent decrease in surface
wettability leads to early tear film breakup and amplifies hyperosmolarity via a Vicious Circle. Pain in dry
eye is caused by tear hyperosmolarity, loss of lubrication, inflammatory mediators and neurosensory fac￾tors, while visual symptoms arise from tear and ocular surface irregularity. Increased friction targets
damage to the lids and ocular surface, resulting in characteristic punctate epithelial keratitis, superior
limbic keratoconjunctivitis, filamentary keratitis, lid parallel conjunctival folds, and lid wiper epitheliop￾athy. Hybrid dry eye disease, with features of both aqueous deficiency and increased evaporation, is
common and efforts should be made to determine the relative contribution of each form to the total
picture. To this end, practical methods are needed to measure tear evaporation in the clinic, and similarly,
methods are needed to measure osmolarity at the tissue level across the ocular surface, to better determine
the severity of dry eye. Areas for future research include the role of genetic mechanisms in non-Sjogren €
syndrome dry eye, the targeting of the terminal duct in meibomian gland disease and the influence of gaze
dynamics and the closed eye state on tear stability and ocular surface inflammation.
© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Goals
To:
▪ Summarize current understanding of tear physiology as it re￾lates to dry eye disease (DED).
▪ Provide an etiological classification of DED.
▪ Identify the core mechanisms of DED, especially ocular surface
hyperosmolarity, tear instability and the inflammatory
response.
▪ Consider the Vicious Circle of DED and chronic DED as a self￾perpetuating disease.
▪ Discuss asymptomatic and symptomatic DED and the basis of
DED symptoms.
* Corresponding author. Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Univer￾sity of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
E-mail address: anthony.bron@eye.ox.ac.uk (A.J. Bron). 1 Subcommittee Co-Chair
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Ocular Surface
journal homepage: www.theocularsurface.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtos.2017.05.011
1542-0124/© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510
i An update to this article is included at the end
▪ Review the role of environment in precipitating DED in at-risk
subjects and influencing DED severity.
2. Definition of dry eye disease
TFOS DEWS II has redefined dry eye as: “Dry eye is a multifac￾torial disease of the ocular surface characterized by a loss of ho￾meostasis of the tear film, and accompanied by ocular symptoms, in
which tear film instability and hyperosmolarity, ocular surface
inflammation and damage, and neurosensory abnormalities play
etiological roles” (see TFOS DEWS II Definition & Classification
Subcommittee report [1221]).
3. Introduction
The purpose of this report is to review our understanding of the
pathophysiology of DED, highlighting those advances that have
occurred since the TFOS DEWS report [1]. Our general thesis is that
DED is initiated by desiccating stress and perpetuated by a Vicious
Circle of ocular surface inflammation.
The raison d'etre of the eye is sight and the precorneal tear film
and the cornea provide the first refractive element of the eye that
focuses an image of the visual world upon the retina. To maintain
optical quality, the tear film must be constantly replenished by
blinking and tear secretion. Without this, the tear film would
destabilise and the surface of the eye would be exposed to
damaging desiccation. Various mechanisms are in place to achieve
homeostasis.
4. Anatomy and physiology of the ocular surface and lacrimal
system
4.1. Ocular surface
The ocular surface is covered by a continuous sheet of epithe￾lium, lining the cornea, the anterior globe and tarsi and extending
to the mucocutaneous junctions (MCJs) of the lid margins. Hydra￾tion of the ocular surface is maintained by the tears, which bathe it
continuously and provide an unbroken film over its exposed sur￾face. The tears are secreted chiefly by the lacrimal glands, with
additional contributions from the conjunctiva, including the goblet
cells and Meibomian glands.
The open eye is constantly subjected to desiccating stress
through evaporation of the tears, but is protected from damage by
homeostatic mechanisms that regulate tear secretion and distribu￾tion in response to signals from the ocular surface. In DED, a failure of
these mechanisms leads to a quantitative or qualitative deficiency of
tears that typically induces tear film instability, wetting defects and
hyperosmolar stress, increased friction and chronic mechanical
irritation at the ocular surface. This initiates a chain of inflammatory
events and surface damage that characterise the disease.
4.2. Main and accessory lacrimal glands
The main lacrimal gland is a tubule-acinar, serous gland
composed primarily of acinar, ductal, and myoepithelial cells, with
the acinar cells comprising 80% of the total. It develops by a process
of branching, involving reciprocal interactions between the
epithelium and surrounding mesenchyme [2,3] to produce a three￾dimensional tubular network [4]. In humans, the main gland con￾sists of a larger orbital lobe, and a smaller palpebral lobe that abuts
the conjunctival sac. The ducts from the orbital lobe pass through,
and join with, those of the palpebral gland, to open into the
superior fornix [5], via 6 to 12 orifices [6]. In addition, there are
about 40 accessory glands of Krause located in the upper fornix and
6 to 8 in the lower fornix. The accessory lacrimal glands of Wolfring,
located in the upper (2e5 glands) and lower (1e3 glands) lids, are
slightly larger than those of Krause. The accessory lacrimal glands
are tubular glands which do not contain acini in humans [7], but do
in rabbits [8]. The accessory glands constitute about 10% of the total
lacrimal tissue mass [9] and are innervated similarly to the main
gland [10]. They are therefore assumed to respond in a similar way
to reflex stimulation.
4.2.1. Resident immune cells of the lacrimal gland
The lacrimal gland is richly supplied by immune cells that
occupy the interstitial space. They include: plasma cells, B and T
cells, dendritic cells, macrophages, bone marrow-derived mono￾cytes, and mast cells [11] (Table 1).
Plasma cells predominate (53.9% of the total), mainly immuno￾globulin (Ig) Aþ and with a few IgGþ, IgM þ or IgDþ. The IgA þ cells
synthesize and secrete IgA, which is transported into acinar and
ductal cells, combined with J-piece and secretory component (SC)
and secreted as dimeric, secretory IgA (sIgA) [12,13]. A similar event
may occur in the conjunctiva and in other Eye-Associated
Lymphoid Tissues (EALT) [14].
T cells are the next most common cell, (40.3% of total), dispersed
with plasma cells in the interstitium, in follicles and aggregates and
occasionally between acinar cells. T cell aggregates are typically
related to intra-lobular ducts. Overall, T suppressor/cytotoxic cells
(T8) are more numerous than T helper cells (T4), distributed almost
equally between acini, ducts and interstitium. The T4/T8 ratio is
0.26 in the interstitium. However, T4 cells predominate in follicles
and lymphocytic aggregates. Dendritic cells, macrophages, bone
marrow-derived monocytes and mast cells are also present.
B-cells are found exclusively in the centre of primary follicles
and aggregates and in solitary, secondary follicles, surrounded by T
helper cells and a lesser number of suppressor/cytotoxic cells. They
are not found in the interstitium. They make up 5.7% of the
mononuclear population. B-cells and the dendritic cells of follicles
and aggregates express human leukocyte antigen D-related (HLA￾DR) as do duct lining cells and the vascular endothelium. Macro￾phages and dendritic cells are uncommon.
4.2.2. Regulation of lacrimal secretion
The acinar cells are arranged in lobules around a central lumen,
with tight junctions surrounding each cell on the apical (luminal)
side [12,15]. This configuration permits the unidirectional, basal-to￾apical, secretion of water, electrolytes, proteins and mucins [12,15].
The basal portion of the cell contains a large nucleus, rough
endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, and Golgi apparatus while
the apical portion is filled with secretory granules [12,15]. The
acinar cells synthesize, store, and secrete proteins and mucins in
response to neural and hormonal stimuli [13,15]. They also secrete
electrolytes and water. Many of the proteins secreted have either
growth factor or bactericidal properties, which are crucial to the
health of the ocular surface. Several mucins, both secreted as well
as membrane-bound have been detected in the lacrimal gland
including MUC1, MUC4, MUC5B, MUC5Ac, MUC6, MUC7 and
MUC16 [16e18]. Some of them perform local roles but otherwise
their functions are not known.
Like the acinar cells, the duct cells are polarized by apically
located tight junctions [12]. Importantly, the ductal cells modify the
primary fluid secreted by the acinar cells by absorbing or secreting
water and electrolytes [19,20]. The duct cells secrete a KCl-rich
solution so that the finally secreted lacrimal gland fluid is rich in
Kþ ions. It has been estimated that as much as 30% of the volume of
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 439
the final lacrimal gland fluid is secreted by the duct cells [19,20].
The myoepithelial cells lie scattered between the acinar and
ductal cells and the basal lamina and are interconnected by gap
junctions and desmosomes [21] They synthesize basal lamina and
their multiple processes form a functional network around the
acinar and ductal cells, separating them from the basal lamina and
the mesenchymal, stromal cells [22]. Myoepithelial cells contain
contractile muscle proteins (a smooth muscle actin, myosin,
tropomyosin) [21], and are assumed to assist in expelling fluid from
the acini and the ducts.
The lacrimal gland is innervated by the parasympathetic and
sympathetic nervous system [23,24]. Nerve terminals are located in
close proximity to acinar, ductal, and myoepithelial cells as well as
blood vessels, and hence can control a wide variety of lacrimal
gland functions [23,24]. Stimulation of lacrimal gland secretion
occurs in part through a neural reflex arc originating from the
ocular surface [13,15,23,25] with a further trigeminal input arising
from the nasal mucosa [26]. Neurotransmitters and neuropeptides
released by innervating nerves include acetylcholine, vasoactive
intestinal peptide (VIP), norepinephrine, neuropeptide Y (NPY),
substance P (SP), and calcitonin gene related peptide (CGRP). Each
of these neuromediators interacts with specific receptors present
on the surface of lacrimal gland cells to elicit a specific response
[13,15,25]. Acetylcholine and norepinephrine are the most potent
stimuli of lacrimal gland protein, mucin, water, and electrolyte
secretion [13,15].
4.2.3. Lacrimal gland stem cells
The lacrimal glands, like the salivary and mammary glands,
retain their ability to regenerate through their whole life span. For
epithelial cells of the salivary glands the reported cell turnover is
40e65 days for serous acini and 95 days for duct cells [27]. Since the
lacrimal glands share many characteristics in common with the
salivary glands, it is possible that lacrimal epithelial cells have a
similar cell turnover rate.
Stem cells are present in the lacrimal glands of mice [28], rats
[29] and humans [28] and their involvement in repair has been
studied in mice [30]. In a lacrimal gland injury model, stem cells
participated in lacrimal gland regeneration [31] and those isolated
from murine glands by Ackermann et al. had the ability to differ￾entiate into all three germ layers [28].
4.2.4. Mechanisms of gland damage and repair
When the lacrimal gland is damaged acutely, (eg. following
radiation exposure) or chronically (eg. in Sjogren syndrome and €
other autoimmune diseases) [32] the lacrimal gland is infiltrated
by lymphocytes and other immune cells, with a predilection for
the peri-ductal areas. This leads to a loss of acinar, ductal and
myoepithelial cells, probably by both apoptosis and autophagy.
Remodeling following injury often recapitulates events that
govern embryonic tissue development and it is therefore not sur￾prising that programmed cell death and a number of growth factors
and cytokines known to regulate tissue development play a role
during lacrimal regeneration [30,32]. A key mechanism in the
murine gland is epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which,
during embryogenesis, helps epithelial cells to acquire migratory
and/or invasive properties [33]. During EMT, epithelial cells lose
cell-cell and cell-matrix attachments, polarity and epithelial￾specific markers, undergo cytoskeletal remodeling, and gain a
mesenchymal phenotype [33]. Induction of EMT generates cells
with mesenchymal stem-like properties, which can play a signifi-
cant role in tissue repair [34,35].
4.3. The meibomian glands
The meibomian glands are modified sebaceous, holocrine glands
whose acini discharge their entire contents in the process of secre￾tion. Their secretory product (meibomian lipid or meibum) is
delivered into a shallow reservoir on the skin of the lid margin, just
anterior to the mucocutaneous junction, and is spread onto the
preocular tear film with each blink. The embryology, anatomy, his￾tology and physiology of the glands were reviewed fully in the report
of the TFOS Meibomian Gland Dysfunction Workshop (2011) [36]
and elsewhere [37] and only selected aspects are discussed here.
The development of the meibomian glands has features in
common with that of the pilosebaceous unit [38]. The luminal cells
of the meibomian ducts, corresponding to the keratinized lining of
the lash shaft, express keratohyalin granules and have been
regarded as a modified, keratinized epithelium [39]. The glands of
Zeiss, which satisfy the sebaceous needs of the cilia, are analogous
to the meibomian glands. It appears that the capacity of the mei￾bomian duct cells to keratinize is amplified in certain conditions,
such as meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD) where keratinization
of the terminal duct is a key feature, in metaplastic trichiasis where
dystopic cilia may arise from meibomian orifices, in distichiasis
where a row of aberrant lashes replaces that of the meibomian
glands, and in follicular ichthyosis where both the meibomian
glands and pilosebaceous units of the skin are affected together.
The human meibomian gland is richly innervated with sensory,
sympathetic, and parasympathetic nerves [40,41]. These nerve fi-
bers express substance P (SP), vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP),
dopamine b-hydroxylase, acetylcholinesterase, nitric oxide syn￾thase, tyrosine hydroxylase, somatostatin, neuropeptide Y (NPY),
and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) [40,41]. Human mei￾bomian gland epithelial cells also express functional muscarinic
and VIP receptors, and respond to an acetylcholine analog, car￾bamyl choline, and/or VIP with alterations in cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) and intracellular [Ca2þ] levels and cellular
proliferation [42]. During differentiation these cells also have
increased expression of genes coding for proteins with neuron
remodeling and axon guidance activities (e.g. netrin 4 and collagen,
type V, alpha2) [43]. In addition to humans, the mouse meibomian
gland contains mRNAs of receptors for cholinergic, adrenergic, NPY,
serotonin, CGRP, dopamine, g-aminobutyric acid, glutamate, neu￾rotensin, and somatostatin [36].
Multiple factors are known to regulate the meibomian gland.
The meibomian gland in vivo [36], (see TFOS DEWS II Sex, Gender
and Hormones Subcommittee report [1222]), and human
Table 1
Resident immune cells of the normal human lacrimal gland.
Tissue Layer Plasma Cells T Cells T cell Phenotype B-Cells Macs DCs pDCs
Acinar 53.9% 40.3% Generally, suppressor/cytotoxic
T cells dominate
5.7% 0.01% 5.6% þ
Ductal þ
Interstitium þþþþ þ
Follicles & Aggregates Espec. peri-ductal Generally, helper cells dominate þþ
Notes Mainly IgA þ Some IgG, M, D Activated T cells 0.01%
Macs ¼ Macrophages; DCs ¼ Dendritic Cells; pDCs ¼ Plasmacytoid cells; Data from Ref. [11].
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 440
meibomian gland epithelial cells in vitro [42,43,45e61], respond to
numerous agents with alterations in proliferation, differentiation,
cAMP accumulation, signaling pathways, gene expression and/or
lipogenesis. These compounds include androgens, estrogens, pro￾gesterone, glucocorticoids, insulin, pituitary hormones, mineralo￾corticoids, growth factors, bacterial toxins, antibiotics, cationic
amphiphilic drugs, omega fatty acids, retinoic acid, high glucose,
cyclosporine A, an IL-1 receptor antagonist, rebamipide, bimato￾prost, pilocarpine and timolol [42,43,45e54,56e60,62,63].
Chemical analysis of expressed meibomian lipid shows it to
consist of about 95% nonpolar lipids (mainly wax and cholesterol
esters, with a small amount of triglycerides) and 5% polar lipids,
(the amphipathic lipid, O-acyl-u-hydroxy-fatty acid (OAHFA) [64]
and phospholipids (PL)) [65]. The concentration of OAHFA ex￾ceeds that of PL in meibum but the ratio is reversed in the tear film
[66]. The lipid composition of meibum and tears is discussed fully
in the TFOS DEWS II Tear Film Subcommittee report [1223].
The key building block for cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis is
cytosolic acetyl-CoA, a product of carbohydrate, fatty acid or amino
acid metabolism [67]. Cholesterol biosynthesis involves the suc￾cessive conversion of acetyl-CoA to acetoacetyl-CoA, 3-hydroxy-3-
methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) and mevalonate, catalyzed
respectively by acetoacetyl-CoA-synthase, HMG-CoA synthase 1
and HMG-CoA reductase. Cholesterol itself is utilized in the syn￾thesis of sex steroid hormones and the enzymes regulating this
process are present in the human meibomian gland [68].
Fatty acid biosynthesis involves the initial conversion of cyto￾solic acetyl-CoA into malonyl-CoA, catalyzed by the rate-limiting
enzyme, acetyl-CoA carboxylase. Malonyl-CoA is then converted
into palmitoyl-CoA in the presence of the enzyme fatty acid syn￾thase and ultimately, palmitoyl-CoA is elongated into longer chain,
saturated fatty acids by the addition of 2-carbon units. Production
of unsaturated fatty acids requires the action of fatty acid desa￾turases. The fatty acids are utilized to create neutral and polar
lipids. Messenger RNAs for each of the above-mentioned enzymes
and others involved in cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis, have
been demonstrated in the murine meibomian gland in addition to
mRNAs for the sterol regulatory element binding proteins (SREBPs)
1 and 2, which play a critical role in regulating their activity at a
transcriptional level [69] SREBP 1 has also been identified in human
meibomian gland epithelial cells [52].
The SREBPs, together with the membrane binding transcription
factor proteases, (MBTPs), site-1 and 2, (otherwise known as site 1
and site 2 proteases - S1P and S2P) are key regulators of cholesterol
and fatty acid synthesis and homeostasis [70].
SREBP-1 and SREBP-2 are membrane-bound transcription fac￾tors located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). When the cellular
demand for lipid rises, SREBPs, complexed with the escort protein,
Scap, are transported within coated vesicles to the Golgi apparatus,
where they undergo activation within the Golgi membrane. This
occurs in two stages. In the first step, the site-1 serine protease, S1P,
cleaves the SREBP protein within the Golgi membrane. In the sec￾ond step, the amino terminal fragment, containing the transcrip￾tion factor, is rapidly released by the site 2 protease and migrates
into the cell nucleus where it activates the transcription of genes
needed for cholesterol uptake and synthesis as well as those
involved with fatty acid metabolism [67,71,72].
There are additional membrane-bound transcription factors
within the ER that act as so-called ER ‘stress sensors’. A deficiency in
either function, sterol biosynthesis or the ER stress response, may
be the basis of the X-linked syndrome of ichthyosis follicularis,
atrichia, and photophobia (IFAP syndrome), in which there is a
failure of pilosebaceous development in the skin and lids resulting
from mutations in the MBTPS2 gene [73].
Of relevance to the role of hormones on meibomian gland
function and dysfunction, mRNAs for each of the above-mentioned
genes have been shown to be upregulated by testosterone in the
castrated mouse model, including adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-
citrate lyase and acetyl-CoA synthase, enzymes which are critical
for the initiation of lipogenesis [44,69]. Schirra et al. have suggested
that the enhanced expression of genes for SREBPs 1 and 2 in
response to androgen exposure may explain the hormonal induc￾tion of meibomian lipids [68]. SREBP 1 is known to be controlled by
androgens at other sites [72].
4.4. The conjunctiva
The conjunctiva is a mucous membrane with a lamina propria
(stroma) of loose connective tissue, covered by an epithelium that is
kept permanently moist. The conjunctiva acts as a barrier against the
outer environment and secretes a variety of products into the tear
film. It also takes up antigens selectively for immune protection.
Several regions of the conjunctiva can be identified [74,75]. The
‘marginal’ zone extends from the subtarsal fold to the MCJ on the lid
margin [76] and includes the mucosa of the lid wiper zone [36].
Proximal to this, the tarsal conjunctiva is tightly attached to the tarsal
plate and then continues as a loose orbital zone towards the fornix.
4.4.1. Conjunctival epithelium
The conjunctival epithelial cells, tightly connected by adherens
junctions which provide strength against shear stress and the most
superficial (i.e. layer 1) cells, are sealed by tight junctions which act
as a barrier against the outside world. This barrier is less tight than
that of the corneal epithelium [77a]. Alterations of conjunctival and
corneal integrity are associated with ocular surface disease (OSD)
[78]. Between the conjunctival epithelial cells are considerable
intercellular spaces [79a] that are assumed to be associated with a
role in water transport across the epithelium. The conjunctival
epithelium consists of two cell types - epithelial cells and goblet
cells, both deriving from the same conjunctival stem cell [80].
The conjunctival epithelial cells produce, apart from water,
electrolytes and mucins [81], functional proteins such as lubricin
[82]. The layer 1 cells produce integral membrane mucins that
constitute the superficial glycocalyx of the cell, necessary for wet￾ting by the aqueous tears [83]. Conjunctival epithelial cells contain
transmembrane water channels (aquaporins) concerned with wa￾ter movement between the conjunctiva and the aqueous phase of
the tear film [84]. A further epithelial function may be an SC￾mediated transcytosis of IgA, from plasma cells in the lamina
propria, but this has yet to be shown [85].
4.4.2. Conjunctival epithelial stem cells
Stem cells may be defined as progenitor cells with a high ca￾pacity for cell division and the ability to generate a terminally
differentiated progeny [86,87]. The stem cells of the corneal
epithelium are located at the limbus and the subject has been
reviewed extensively [88e91]. The location of the conjunctival
stem cells in the human is more controversial. Wei et al., using
tritiated thymidine in the rabbit concluded that the fornix was a
major site of conjunctival stem cells [92,93]. Pellegrini et al., how￾ever, using clonal analysis of cells from various sites, reported that
conjunctival stem cells are uniformly distributed in the human
bulbar conjunctiva [80]. Pe'er and colleagues, in the mouse, using a
tritiated thymidine label, identified conjunctival progenitor cells at
both the limbus and the mucocutaneous junction (MCJ), with the
MCJ giving rise to cells that streamed toward the fornix [94].
Wirtschafter et al., reported a similar finding in the rabbit, with a
focus of label-retaining cells at the MCJ of the lid margin, whose
transient amplifying progeny migrated over time towards the
fornix [95]. They inferred that conjunctival stem cells were located
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 441
mainly at the MCJ. Most recently, in human cadaveric tissue,
Stewart et al. have reported the expression of stem cell markers
scattered throughout the conjunctiva, with the highest levels in the
medial canthal and inferior fornical areas [96].
4.4.3. Conjunctival goblet cells
Human conjunctival goblet cells are present as single cells,
scattered throughout the conjunctival epithelium save for a small
temporal, perilimbal patch. Their numbers increase from the su￾perior temporal region to the inferior nasal region of the conjunc￾tival sac [97]. They package and secrete the gel-forming mucin,
MUC5AC [83], which, when fully glycosylated has a mass of up to
40 MDa [98,99].
Gel mucins have an enormous water-binding capacity and
thereby transform the aqueous tears into a mucoaqueous gel that
makes up the main volume of the preocular tear film and maintains
moisture at the ocular surface [100]. Mucins also have a lubricative
function at the lid-globe interface that is important for movements
of the eyeball relative to the lids. This lubricative function is needed
in particular at the elevated epithelial lip of the lid-wiper, where the
posterior border of each lid comes into close contact with the globe.
Here, goblet cells are supplied within mucus crypts [101], similar to
those in the tarsal conjunctiva [102]. The mucin of the mucoaqueous
layer has other protective properties, binding microorganisms and
inhibiting their attachment to the epithelium and also binding sIgA,
several antimicrobial proteins and peptides [103]. In this way it
serves as an integral component of the ocular surface surveillance
system [104]. The role of T helper cell (Th1 and Th2) cytokines in
goblet cell homeostasis [105] is discussed in a later section.
Release of the secretory mucin, MUC5AC, can be induced by
either parasympathetic or sympathetic nerve stimulation
[106e108]. In the rat, the parasympathetic neurotansmitters
acetylcholine and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) stimulate
conjunctival goblet cell secretion in vivo, in both cells and organ
culture [108e110]. In addition, nucleotides that activate the P2Y2
receptor, such as ATP and uridine triphosphate (UTP), and also P2Y2
receptor agonists, can stimulate goblet cell mucin secretion in rat
and human conjunctiva [111,112]. Additionally, the epidermal
growth factors (EGF) and brain-derived growth factor (BDNF)
stimulate a slow release of MUC5AC from cultured rat conjunctival
goblet cells [110,113].
4.4.4. Resident immune cells of the conjunctiva
A study of the resident leukocytes of the human conjunctiva by
Hingorani et al. showed a greater number in the bulbar than tarsal
conjunctiva [114], although other distributions have been reported
[115].
T cells (CD3þ) were the dominant cell population, 75% of which
were memory, or primed T cells (CD45Roþ) rising to 75e100% in
the epithelium. CD8þ T cells were more common than CD4þ T cells
in the epithelium whereas their numbers were roughly equal in the
stroma. Macrophages (CD68þ) were the second most frequent
conjunctival leukocyte present in both epithelium and stroma, ac￾counting, with Langerhans cells, for those cells expressing HLA-DR.
The exact numbers of leukocytes in general and lymphocytes in
particular vary in different studies [114,116,117], but authors agree
that T-lymphocytes dominate over B-lymphocytes, and that, of the
plasma cells, those that produce IgA by far outnumber those that
produce IgM. Neutrophils and occasionally, B cells, were present in
the epithelium of both bulbar and tarsal conjunctiva while plasma
cells, natural killer cells and mast cells, present in small numbers,
were confined to the stroma. As Hingorani et al. conclude, T cells,
macrophages and occasional B cells and neutrophils in the
epithelium and T cells, B cells, macrophages, plasma cells, NK cells,
mast cells and neutrophils in the substantia propria may be
considered normal. A fuller review of the cellular, ocular surface
immune defence system can be found elsewhere [117e119].
Hingorani et al.found only a single example of a lymphoid
aggregate compatible with the presence of CALT (conjunctiva-asso￾ciated lymphoid tissue), part of the MALT system of mucosa￾associated lymphoid tissue, but did not examine fornical tissue,
where CALT aggregates are most likely to be found [120]. Wother￾spoon et al. [121] who examined the entire human superior and
inferior fornical conjunctiva in autopsy material, found organised
lymphoid tissue in only 31% of cases. The resident immune cells of the
conjunctiva are summarised in Table 2 and those of the cornea in
Table 3.
4.5. The glycocalyx of the ocular surface epithelia
The apical membranes of the layer 1 cells of the ocular surface
epithelia present microvilli and microplicae which project into the
tears and increase the interactive surface area at the tear/cell
interface. Contiguous layer 1 cells are connected by tight junctions
which restrict the entry of water-soluble solutes into the epithe￾lium, and a further barrier is provided by the dense, apical glyco￾calyx [122], rich in transmembrane mucins [83]. Heavy
glycosylation of the mucin exodomains converts the plasma
membranes from a hydrophobic to a hydrophilic surface, which
confers wettability to the epithelium [123e125]. The glycocalyx
also acts as a lubricant that reduces friction at the ocular surface
[126,127] and as a anti-adhesive that combats microbial coloniza￾tion [128,129].
4.5.1. The transmembrane mucins
The transmembrane mucins of the human corneal and
conjunctival epithelial glycocalyx [130], are MUC1 [131], MUC4
[132] and MUC16 [133], with galectin-3 playing additional roles
[134]. The membrane-associated mucins possess short cytoplasmic
tails, a single transmembrane domain and highly O-glycosylated
extracellular, ectodomains with a variable number of tandem re￾peats (VNTR) [135,136] which extend at least 200e500 nm above
the plasma membrane, far beyond other cell surface glycoproteins
[137,138], thereby projecting into the tear film.
MUC1 is the smallest of the three glycocalyx mucins, with a mo￾lecular weight of approximately 120e300 kDa, roughly doubling in
size after full glycosylation [139]. MUC1 exhibits anti-adhesive, cell￾cell and cell-extracellular matrix properties [140,141]. The cyto￾plasmic tail of MUC1 (MUC1-CT) engages in signaling activities
involving phosphorylated serine and tyrosine residues that act as
binding sites for molecules such as NF-kB [142]. These can regulate
the transcription of proinflammatory cytokines, abrogate the inter￾action of b-catenin with E-cadherin and upregulate the expression of
the epithelial mesenchymal transducers (EMTs) [143].
MUC4 has a molecular mass of 900 kDa, several times greater
than that of MUC1 [139]. It is expressed predominantly by
conjunctival epithelium and to a lesser extent by the epithelium of
the limbus and peripheral cornea. Very little is expressed in the
central cornea [132,144].
MUC16 is the largest mucin yet identified in the human body,
with a molecular mass of 2.5 MDa and a potential glycosylated mass
of approximately 20 MDa [136,145,146]. The ectodomain of MUC16
is heavily O-glycosylated and longer than that of the other trans￾membrane mucins. Its cytoplasmic tail binds to the ezrin/radixin/
moesin (ERM) family of proteins, which anchor the mucin to the
actin cytoskeleton of the microvilli [128]. Knockdown of MUC16
expression in human corneal epithelial limbal cells, resulted in
increased rose bengal dye penetration, increased Staphylococcus
aureus binding to the epithelium [128] and disruption of tight
junctions [147]. This, and other evidence [148] confirms MUC16 as a
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 442
key component of the human epithelial glycocalyx barrier, also
contributing to the tight-junctional, paracellular barrier at the
ocular surface. By contrast, knockdown of MUC1 does not lead to
decreased barrier function and moreover, significantly increases
the barrier to dye penetrance and bacterial invasion [149a].
The soluble lectin galectin-3, the most highly expressed
carbohydrate-binding protein of the human conjunctival epithe￾lium [150], is a component of the epithelial glycocalyx. Its carbo￾hydrate recognition domains (CRD) [151] bind to the b-galactoside￾containing glycans [152,153], MUC1 and MUC16, to form a poly￾meric, galectin-glycoprotein lattice which serves various biological
functions, such as the regulation of receptor turnover and modu￾lation of cell-cell, cell-matrix and cell-pathogen interactions [153].
Additionally it contributes to the barrier function of the glycocalyx.
Downregulation of O-glycan synthesis by human corneal epithelial
cells in culture, reduces the barrier to rose bengal penetration, by
decreasing galectin-3 binding within the glycocalyx [134] and a
similar loss of barrier function occurs, in the absence of galectin-3
expression [134]. These findings indicate that mucin O-glycan
interaction with galectin-3 creates a protective lattice barrier
within the apical glycocalyx [134,154]. Galectin-3 concentration in
the tears may be of future interest as a marker for DED severity
since its affinity for glycans of the glycocalyx may be reduced by
alterations in glycosylation, or it may be released from the ocular
surface inflammatory cells [155].
4.5.2. Other mucin species
The gel-forming mucin MUC5AC is the chief secretory mucin of
the human ocular surface [132,156,157] although the soluble mucin
MUC7 is detected in the lacrimal gland and in the conjunctival
epithelium [17,158]. In human tears, MUC1, MUC4, MUC16 and
MUC5AC are present, and MUC2 [159] is also detected at very low
levels in the conjunctiva [157]. MUC20, which is the most highly
expressed mucin in human conjunctiva [150], is localized along the
cell membranes of the intermediate cell layers of the corneal and
conjunctival epithelia [160]. mRNA transcripts of the trans￾membrane mucins MUC13, MUC15 and MUC17 have been identi-
fied in human conjunctiva [150,158,160]. Their functions here, as
well as that of MUC20, have not yet been elucidated.
4.6. The tear compartments
When the eyes are open, the tears are distributed in 3
compartments. The fornical compartment, occupies the fornix and
retrotarsal space and the tear menisci and tear film form the pre￾ocular tears. The fornical compartment is assumed to be narrowest
at the lid wiper region of the lid margin, which is directly apposed
to the globe. The preocular tear film overlies the exposed con￾junctiva and cornea [161]. The precorneal tear film follows the
contours of the cornea, is roughly 3 mm in thickness and is highly
stable [162]. The prebulbar film follows the varying contours of the
bulbar conjunctiva but its thickness is unknown.
4.6.1. The tear menisci
Tear menisci are strips of aqueous tear fluid, lying in the angle
between the globe and apposed lid margins, which are formed by
surface tension forces as the lids separate, in a few hundred milli￾seconds, in the upstroke of the blink. A negative hydrostatic pres￾sure within the nascent menisci draws water from the forming tear
film, causing the two compartments to separate over a region of
meniscus-induced thinning. [163,164] This is observable as a black
line of reduced fluorescence in the fluorescein-stained tear film,
where the aqueous layer is of minimum thickness while the lipid
layer remains intact (Fig. 1) [165a]. There is no evidence for a gel￾like layer in the menisci. Instillation of an aqueous drop expands
Table 2
Resident immune cells of normal human conjunctiva.
Layer T cells Macs LCs PMNs B-cells Plasma cells NK cells Mast cells
Epithelium þþþþ þþþ þ þ ±
T cells CD8þ > CD4þCD8þ/CD4þ ¼ 3.3
Stroma þþþþ þþþ ± þ þþ
T cells CD8þ y CD4þCD4þ/CD8þ ¼ 1.3
Macs ¼ macrophages; LCs ¼ Langerhans cells; PMNS ¼ neutrophils; NK ¼ natural killer; Data from Refs. [114,121,1104,1105].
Table 3
Resident immune cells of normal human cornea.
Corneal Layer Cell type (Phenotype)a Peripheral Corneab Central Cornea
Epithelium Langerhans cells (CD45þ CD11cþ CD11blo MHC IIþ Langerinþ) þþþþ þþ
Stroma Bone marrow-derived DCsa (CD45þCD11cþCD11bþCD8a MHCIIþ/ CD80/86þ/ ) þþþþ þþ
Non-LC DCsa (CD11cþ Langerinþ CD11bþ CD103lo) þþþ þþ
Macrophages (CD45þ CD11bþ CD11c ) þþþ þþ
Monocytic precursor cells CD14þ MHCII B7 CD40 GR1 CD3 ) þþþ þþþ
Tissue PMNs (CD45þ Ly6Gþ) þ e
a DC, dendritic cells; LC, Langerhans cells; PMNs, polymorphonuclear cells. b Including limbal region; Data from Refs. [474,1106e1111].
Fig. 1. A fluoresceinestained lower tear meniscus, following drop instillation, The
meniscus is broad and full and is segregated from the stained precorneal tear film by a
black line of meniscus-induced thinning.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 443
the volume of the meniscus and tear film and transiently obliterates
the black line [166].
The negative hydrostatic pressure within the menisci is
responsible for their concave external surface and opposes the
outflow of aqueous into the puncta, so that drainage is limited to
roughly the first 2s of the blink interval [167,168]. This effect is
enhanced as meniscus volume falls and may play a conserving role
in aqueous-deficient dry eye (ADDE).
4.6.1.1. Tear volume and secretion. The volume of the menisci is
directly related to the total volume of the tear fluid [169] and to the
lacrimal secretory rate [170]. Since the height and radius of cur￾vature of the tear menisci are reduced in ADDE their measurement
is of diagnostic value in DED diagnosis [168,171,172]. The volume of
the tears has been estimated to be about 7 ml [173] and secretory
rate 1.03 ± 0.39 ml/min, with a tear turnover (TTR) of 16.19 ± 5.10%/
min [174]. The LG is responsible the bulk of the tear volume and
flow [170] with a smaller portion secreted by the conjunctiva [81].
Lacrimal fluid is distributed to and mixed with the preocular film
during the blink and is then lost by drainage from the tear menisci
via the nasolacrimal system. It is further lost by evaporation from
the exposed preocular tears [175e177].
4.6.2. The precorneal tear film
The precorneal tear film has a superficial lipid layer and a
mucoaqueous layer which occupies the bulk of the tear thickness
and interacts directly with the glycocalyx of the epithelium (see
TFOS DEWS II Tear Film Subcommittee report [1223]). There is also
a slender, superficial aqueous layer. The tear film is highly stable
and its layers cohere during movements of the eye [178].
4.6.3. Tear film lipid layer
The tear film lipid layer (TFLL) derives from the meibum reser￾voir at the lid margins and is spread onto the tear film with each
blink, driven by surface tension forces. It has a mean thickness of
42 nm (15e157 nm) [179]. It plays a significant role in stabilizing
the tear film and has been considered until recently to provide a
barrier to tear evaporation [36,180,181]. However, some previous
and more recent studies have suggested that it reduces evaporation
from the mucoaqueous subphase by no more than 10% [182]. This
question is critical to the designation of some forms of DED as
evaporative dry eye (EDE) e ie. dependent on an excessive evapo￾rative loss from the ocular surface and is discussed further in the
report of the TFOS DEWS II Tear Film Subcommittee [1223].
The meibomian glands secrete a lipid mixture (meibum) which
is liquid at body temperature, with a melting range between 19.5
and 32.9  C according to Tiffany [181], or 10e40  C according to
Butovich et al. [183] The clear oil can be expressed from the mei￾bomian orifices by pressing over the glands through the closed lids.
Expressibility is greatest nasally and least temporally [184]. De￾livery of oil to the lid margin occurs in part through secretion and in
part by the expression of small aliquots with each blink. The lid
reservoir contains at least 30 times the amount of lipid present on
the surface of the tear film (approximately 300 mg vs 10 mg,
respectively [185,186].
It is likely that excretion of meibum occurs by flow of lipid from
the reservoirs over the lid margin skin and lashes. This would serve
to resist tear film contamination by sebaceous skin lipids (sebum).
In keeping with the earlier proposal of Holly [187] and further
studies by McCulley [188], the TFLL is considered to organize itself
into a layer, a few molecules thick, rich in polar lipids and some
long-chain fatty acids and a superficial layer of non-polar lipids.
Some proteins and glycoproteins, such as lipocalins, lysozyme, and
mucin, are thought to be intercalated with the lipid layer and
enhance its stability [189e191].
4.6.3.1. Spreading of the lipid layer. The tear film lipid layer is
formed in the upstroke of each blink, when lipid from the lower
meibomian reservoir spreads upward over the aqueous subphase of
the preocular tear film [192,193]. It has been suggested that thin￾ning of the lipid layer superiorly creates a local rise in surface
tension, which is the driving force for spreading [193]. It has been
proposed that spreading initially involves an interaction between
the polar meibomian lipids and the aqueous phase of the tear film
[190] and that the polar lipid layer then acts as a carrier for the
nonpolar lipid fraction. In the normal eye, spreading of the tear film
lipid layer can be observed clinically by interference video micro￾scopy, when it is seen as an upwardly moving front of horizontally￾disposed, colored fringes. The lipid film spreads rapidly at first
(about 10 mm/s), lagging markedly behind the upper lid, whose
excursion is completed over a few hundred milliseconds [194].
Spreading slows and stabilizes after 1 s or more, with the inter￾ference pattern showing remarkable stability over the remainder of
the blink interval [194,195].
Spreading of the TFLL is slower in patients with a tear film lipid
deficiency (Goto 2003) and also in aqueous tear deficiency [194],
which is attributed to the thinness of the aqueous phase. Also, in
the former condition the spreading TFLL pattern has been reported
to take on a more vertical arrangement [195].
The pattern of colored fringes shown by interferometry is due to
topographic variations in thickness of the lipid layer across the film
and reflects its intermolecular organization. This can be shown to
be remarkably stable during blinking and eye movements. Over a
series of blinks the pattern can retain its gross features from blink
to blink, only degrading by degrees in a stepwise fashion until it
changes abruptly and the process begins again [197]. In this situ￾ation it appears that the TFLL is stripped from the mucoaqueous
layer and compressed during the downstroke of the blink and
restored in the upstroke, with only a moderate disturbance of its
intermolecular organization between consecutive blinks. The
period over which this can be observed may be greatly shortened in
patients with a tear lipid layer deficiency suggesting that inter￾molecular stability is lost [198]. This is the basis of a clinical test
[199].
Similarly, the interference pattern shows great stability during a
series of horizontal saccades, again showing only a moderate
stepwise degradation over a series of saccades. In this case the TFLL
and mucoaqueous subphase behave as a fluid shell that moves with
the cornea during each saccade [197]. The influence of a DED state
on this behavior would merit study.
4.6.4. The aqueous layer and mucoaqueous subphase
Deep to the TFLL is a mucin-rich layer that is conveniently
referred to as the mucoaqueous subphase [200]. The presence of a
superficial aqueous layer at its surface, as proposed by Wolff has
been debated [201], but it is reasonable to assume that in the
process of tear film formation, as aqueous tears are drawn off into
the menisci, some residual fluid is retained at the surface of the
mucoaqueous layer. (See TFOS DEWS II Tear Film Subcommittee
report [1223]) This fluid layer can be expanded transiently by the
instillation of a saline drop [166].
Observation of the fluorescein-stained tear film indicates that
the mucoaqueous layer of the precorneal film is freshly deposited
with each blink and has the physical properties of a gel, due to the
presence of the goblet cell mucin [197]. Its mucin component is
presumed to be a product chiefly of the tarsal goblet cells, whereas
that of the prebulbar film is likely to be an admixture of mucins from
both tarsal and bulbar glands. An additional coating is received by
the peripheral cornea as its passes behind the lids during eye
movements in any direction of gaze [197].
The mucoaqueous subphase performs a lubricating function
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 444
between the lids and globe [99] and probably maintains wettability
of the ocular surface where the glycocalyx is defective, for instance
after an abrasion [201]. It also traps shed epithelial cells, inflam￾matory cells, debris and microorganisms, which are collected into a
mucous thread in the lower conjunctival sac and ultimately lost via
the punctum [202,203].
The mucoaqueous layer contains salts and numerous proteins
derived from the LG, conjunctiva and meibomian gland. Proteins
include growth factors such as epidermal growth factor (EGF) and
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), that are essentials for the main￾tenance of the epithelium [204,205]. There are also defense pro￾teins, such as lysozyme, lactoferrin, surfactant protein-D, and trefoil
peptide, concerned with innate immunity, and sIgA [205,206].
Those proteins of lacrimal origin, such as lysozyme and lactoferrin,
are decreased in ADDE, making the eye more vulnerable to infec￾tion. It has been predicted that the level of these proteins will be
normal in EDE where lacrimal function is normal and it would be of
value to test this prediction [207].
Plasma proteins, such as albumin, may leak into the tears in DED
as a result of inflammation, due to an increase in conjunctival
vascular capillary permeability [205,208,209] and, probably, also
conjunctival epithelial permeability. The LG cannot be excluded as
an additional source.
4.7. Closed eye tears
Overnight eye closure causes a number of physiological changes
at the ocular surface. The pO2 falls and there is a shift towards
anaerobic tissue metabolism [210,211]. The tear pH and tear os￾molarity fall [212,213], the anterior cornea becomes relatively
hypoxic, epithelial permeability increases and corneal edema oc￾curs [214,215]. There is no change in tear glucose levels [216].
Jordan and Baum proposed that, in the waking state, tear
secretion is driven in part, by sensory stimuli from the ocular sur￾face, with the expectation that it will be at it lowest when ambient
stress is at a minimum [217]. This was born out by the studies of
Sack and colleagues, who demonstrated that lacrimal secretion was
negligible after an extended period of sleep or eye closure, a change
accompanied by a sharp rise in the level of tear sIgA, from around
2% in reflex tear samples, compared to 58% in closed eye tears [218].
Conversely, the levels of lysozyme, lactoferrin and lipocalin, pro￾teins of lacrimal origin which account for about 85e88% of the total
protein in basal and reflex tear samples, decrease in closed eye tears
to less than 30% of the total [218]. The rise in sIgA concentration
may reflect that, unlike the lacrimal-specific proteins, lysozyme,
lactoferrin, lipocalin and peroxidase [219], the secretion of sIgA, of
plasma cell origin, is not directly coupled to lacrimal secretion.
Therefore the rise could be explained by the continued delivery of
IgA at the same rate into a lacrimal fluid of greatly reduced volume.
This fall in volume secretion also explains, in part, the rise in tear
concentration of certain plasma proteins such as vitronectin,
fibronectin, a1-antiprotease, a2-antiplasmin, a1-antichymotrypsin
and IgG [220,221], which enter the tears by diffusion across
conjunctival capillary and epithelial barriers. Such proteins are
present in closed eye tears at 2e4% of the serum level, well above
the level found in reflex tears. Sack also refers to an increase in
vascular permeability in the closed eye state [209].
A striking feature of closed eye tears is a massive accumulation
of activated PMNs within the tear fluid several hours after eye
closure [218]. Their appearance is preceded by 1e2 h [222], by very
high levels of two potent leukotaxic mediators, IL-8 and LTB4. Up to
70% of this leukotaxic activity is removed by immunoprecipitation
with antibodies to IL-8, indicating that it is not substantially of PMN
origin. Degranulation of the PMNs releases several potent pro￾teases, such as protease-3, elastase, capthepsin G, MMP-9 and
urokinase, which, due to the simultaneous presence of a wide range
of antiproteases, do not lead to autolytic digestion. Also, despite the
presence of the potent angiogenic agent, 12 (R)- hydroxyeicosa￾trienoic acid [223], and of IL-8, which might stimulate corneal
neovascularization, a build-up of a 2-macroglobulin (a2-M) and the
conversion of plasminogen to angiostatin, appears to prevent this
outcome.
Closed eye tears are also extremely rich in reactive complement
products, normally absent [224] from open eye tears. Closed eye
tears contain all of the complement components required for the
classical and alternate pathways of complement activation, in a
concentration of about 2e4% of that of serum. Factors B and C3,
however, reach levels approaching one-third of that in serum,
suggesting a local source [224]. A significant proportion of the C3 in
closed eye tears is converted to C3c and Sack et al. inferred that,
since closed eye tears contain two inhibitors of complement con￾version (lactoferrin and sIgA), C3 conversion probably occurs
through the alternative pathway or by plasmin cleavage [218]. It
was also proposed that modulators of complement activation
divert the complement system away from membrane-attack com￾plex formation towards opsonization.
In summary, powerful defense and scavenging mechanisms
come into play during prolonged eye closure, which serve to
remove microbial threats to the ocular surface. These events are
highly regulated so that no harm comes to the ocular surface itself.
However, this is a potentially risky strategy that could be destabi￾lized in the DED state and the Subcommittee recommends the
investigation of closed eye tears and of conjunctival impression
cytology specimens following prolonged eye closure, in DED pa￾tients. There will be added interest to study patients with Sjogren €
syndrome, since a genetically-determined, dysfunctional response
to inflammatory triggers might create a dysfunctional closed eye
tear response.
4.8. Extracellular DNA and NETs in dry eye
A new mechanism leading to tissue damage in DED has been
identified since the TFOS DEWS report [1], involving the release of
DNA into the tears from desquamating ocular surface epithelial
cells and invading neutrophils. This extracellular DNA (eDNA) can,
on its own, or combined with molecular components of neutrophil
origin, cause direct damage to the ocular surface.
4.8.1. Extracellular DNA of epithelial origin
A source of eDNA is from desquamated ocular surface epithelial
cells of conjunctival [114,225], and presumably corneal, origin.
Extracellular DNA, facilitated by cathelicidin binding [226], is able
to enter cells and stimulate an inflammatory signaling pathway
[227], by binding to TLR9 within the cell and initiating a signaling
cascade through MyD88. This has two consequences: i. the initia￾tion of a type 1 IFN response [228], and ii the generation of a
powerful neutrophil recruitment signal [229e231]. In support of
this concept, topical application of a synthetic bacterial DNA mimic
to injured corneal epithelium results in the recruitment of neu￾trophils to the corneas of wild-type, but not TLR9  / mice [232].
Increased expression of mRNA for TLR9, MyD88, and interferon
(IFN)-type I pathway genes has been found in the exfoliated
conjunctival cells from patients with severe ADDE [114,225] and
patients with Sjogren syndrome € [233], suggesting that epithelial
cells contribute to the inflammatory response directly, and also
engage in PMN recruitment. Type 1 IFNs (IFN-a/b) augment den￾dritic cell maturation and activate the adaptive immune system.
Increased expression of mRNA for IL-6 and TNF-a was also
demonstrated in exfoliated conjunctival cells. The expression of
these inflammatory cytokines increases in the corneal and
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 445
conjunctival epithelium in some forms of experimental DED
[234,235].
4.8.2. Extracellular DNA of neutrophil origin
Neutrophils are key players in the host innate immune response
and constitute a first line of defense. While they are present only in
small numbers in the normal conjunctiva [114] they are recruited to
the ocular surface in profusion in inflammation and are abundant
on the ocular surface and in the tears of patients with severe ADDE
[114,225].
One strategy adopted by neutrophils, in their defense against
microorganisms, is to release cellular contents into the extracellular
space to form Neutrophil Extracellular Traps or NETs [236]. These
comprise extracellular webs or scaffolds containing decondensed
chromatin, histones, neutrophil elastase and antimicrobial peptides
such as cathelicidin, each of which individually may be toxic for
epithelial cells [237]. Extracellular histones are major mediators of
cell death in sepsis [238], cathelicidin fragments are considered to
cause erythema, inflammation and telangiectasia in patients with
rosacea [239], and neutrophil elastase induces epithelial cell
apoptosis [240]. NETs, with all their molecular components, have
been demonstrated in mucoid films at the ocular surface in DED
[114,225] (Fig. 2). It has been suggested that their association with
mucin relates to the action of neutrophil elastase in cleaving the
extracellular domains of membrance-associated mucins [241]. In
other studies, it has been shown that mucins may induce neutro￾phil activation [242].
In the healthy eye, NETs may play a physiological role in the
defense against pathogens by means of an antimicrobial action and
by confining pathogens to a local site of infection [243]. Addition￾ally, immobilization of neutrophil granules within NETs may pre￾vent the diffusion of potentially noxious proteins and proteases to
the ocular surface. However, in patients with severe ADDE, eDNA
and NETs are present at the ocular surface in excessive amounts
[225] and evidence suggests that they participate in the patho￾genesis of the disease [225]. There are two explanations for their
high levels:
i. Exposure of neutrophils to hyperosmolar stress is a stimulus for
NET formation, and the quantitative release of NETs increases
exponentially with increase in hyperosmolarity. This is relevant
to the situation in severe DED, where, for reasons discussed
elsewhere, high levels of osmolarity may be achieved in the
tears [244]. Hyperosmolar stress also has an inhibitory effect on
some critical neutrophil functions such as migration and
degranulation. Thus, in a hyperosmolar milieu, the classical
neutrophil-related innate defense mechanisms may be
compromised.
ii. In physiological conditions, the level of eDNA and NETs in the
tears is regulated by tear nucleases of lacrimal origin, DNase I,
and lipocalin, (an endonuclease with a lower level of activity).
Nucleases hydrolyze eDNA and enable its clearance from the
ocular surface. The concentration of DNase I in tear fluid is
similar to that in serum and saliva. Importantly, tear fluid
nuclease activity was shown to be low or absent in ADDE pa￾tients [114,225], providing an additional basis for the rise in
eDNA and NETs in the tears in the DED state, including Sjogren €
syndrome DED (SSDE), non-Sjogren syndrome DED (NSDE) and €
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) [245].
Thus it appears that in DED, NET production is stimulated by
tear hyperosmolarity and clearance of both eDNA and NETs is
impaired by the tear nuclease deficiency. Both may participate in
further neutrophil recruitment [225,244]. The use of topical DNase I
therapy for DED is being explored [245].
The Subcommittee recommends that this be considered as an
important area for future research, exploring its involvement in
lesser degrees of DED and also any interaction with the PMN
response in closed eye tears.
4.9. Homeostasis of the tears at the ocular surface
4.9.1. The lacrimal functional unit (LFU)
The production of aqueous tears is regulated to maintain tear
osmolarity within narrow limits at all times [246]. Tear homeo￾stasis is achieved reflexly by the lacrimal functional unit (LFU),
which consists of the ocular surface, its secretory appendages and
the connecting innervation, (Fig. 3) [247]. The trigeminal inner￾vation of the ocular surface epithelia, including the cornea, con￾junctiva and lid margins, provides the afferent limb of the
feedback loop. The parasympathetic, secretomotor innervation of
the ocular appendages, including the lacrimal gland (main,
palpebral and accessory), meibomian glands and the conjunctival
goblet cells, provides the efferent limb of this loop. The
Fig. 2. a. H&E staining of exfoliated surface cells. b. Wide-field fluorescent microscope image after DAPI staining of conjunctival impression material reveals short, sparse eDNA
strands (arrowhead) in normal subjects and c. numerous long eDNA strands in a DED patients (arrowheads). (from Sonawane, S., et al. (2012). “Ocular surface extracellular DNA and
nuclease activity imbalance: a new paradigm for inflammation in DED.” Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 53(13): 8253e8263. e with permission) [225].
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 446
nasolacrimal passage is also considered to contribute to this reflex
system [248]. Another reflex arc that serves to protect the ocular
surface is that subserving the blink.
4.9.2. The secretory reflex arc
The afferent limb of the reflex arc arises in the trigeminal nerve,
whose central endings synapse with neurons in the superior sali￾vatory nucleus in the brain stem, probably located caudal to the
nucleus of the seventh cranial nerve [77b]. In the rabbit, the sensory
innervation of the central cornea is about 10e20 times that of tooth
pulp, while that of the conjunctiva generally is of a lower degree
[249]. However, the sensitivity of the posterior lid margin is similar
to that of the central cornea [250], which is of relevance to the
symptoms of blepharitis.
The efferent limb of the reflex arc is a parasympathetic
pathway whose secretomotor, preganglionic fibres arise in the
superior salivatory nucleus. These fibres exit the pons by the
nervus intermedius of the seventh cranial nerve and reach the
pterygopalatine ganglion via the nerve of the pterygoid canal.
Here, they relay and the postganglionic fibres reach the lacrimal
gland via the lacrimal nerve. An alternative postganglionic
pathway has been described, reaching the gland via the retro￾orbital nerve plexus [251].
The nature of the relay between the afferent and efferent fibres,
in the superior salivatory nucleus, the involvement of interneurons
and the interaction with other inputs and supranuclear pathways,
is not known, nor is the level of central cross-connectivity between
ipsilateral inputs and contralateral outputs fully established. Cur￾rent studies have not excluded their existence [252]. This contrasts
with observations concerning the drive to lacrimal secretion from
the nasolacrimal mucosa where cross-connectivity has been
demonstrated [26] e ipsilateral anesthesia of the nasal mucosa
reduces lacrimal secretion on both sides.
4.9.3. Afferent inputs from the ocular surface
4.9.3.1. Lacrimal secretion and the blink. The trigeminal afferents
from the cornea serve a range of sensory modalities which include
pain, mechanoreception and temperature and full details are given
in the TFOS DEWS II Pain and Sensation report [1224]. Here, it may
be noted that sensory inputs from the ocular surface regulate tear
production and the blink response and are the basis of sensations of
discomfort in DED.
4.9.3.2. Sensory drive to lacrimal secretion. Evidence suggests that
in everyday conditions, lacrimal secretion is driven by sensory
impulses from corneal, cold-modality, thermoreceptors. Addition￾ally, it appears that, in DED, surface desiccation, stimulating this
subset of receptors, in response to hyperosmolarity and surface
cooling, determines the compensatory increase in lacrimal secre￾tion, increase in blink rate and sensation of awareness of the eye,
rising to the level of discomfort. This compensatory response to
drying, occurring in MGD-related DED, where the lacrimal gland is
healthy, may explain why some patients with DED experience
epiphora and appear to have a “wet dry eye” [253].
Bilateral topical anesthesia causes a reduction in reflex tear
secretion of up to two-thirds [217], providing a value which is
sometimes referred to as ‘basal tear secretion’. This is a reasonable
term as long as it is recognised that it refers to a measurement
made in particular environmental conditions and does not exclude
inputs to lacrimal secretion from non-ocular sources. Jordan and
Baum [217] proposed that the lacrimal secretory rate was adjusted
in response to environmental conditions and, as mentioned, tear
production is at its lowest after an extended period of eye closure,
as in overnight sleep [218]. Also, as Cross and Krupin observed in
subjects with normal eyes, basal lacrimal secretion measured after
topical anesthesia, (average Schirmer: 12.8 mm) falls markedly af￾ter 1 h of general anesthesia (to 1.2 mm), suggesting suppression of
Fig. 3. Representation of the Lacrimal Functional Unit. In the waking state aqueous tear flow is modulated by reflex impulses from the ocular surface and nasal passages which
travel in the trigeminal nerve to synapse in the superior salivatory nucleus. (from Dry Eye and Ocular Surface Disorders, Pflugfelder, Beuerman, Stern, 2004 e with permission)
[1102].
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 447
an input from higher central nervous centres [254]. Heigle et al.
concluded, ‘Perhaps lacrimal gland stimulation results from the
sum of sensory inputs from the ipisilateral adnexal skin, cornea,
nasal mucosa, contralateral eye and even central stimulation’ [255].
There are other sensory inputs to the outflow pathway, from the
nasal mucosa, retina and skin, which arise from pain and other
noxious stimuli, such as intense cold or bright light, whose quan￾titative nature is unknown. When unilateral stimulation of the
nasal passage on one side results in an increase in Schirmer wetting
of both anesthetized eyes, (the nasolacrimal reflex) this cannot be
taken as evidence for a reflex response or of cross-connections
between trigeminal inputs from the nasal cavity to the superior
salivatory nucleus. They could reflect a response of higher centres
to the painful stimulus. Tearing in response to painful injury or
retinal stimulation with bright lights could have a similar basis.
Emotional tearing is under the control of higher centres [256] and
there is a hypothalamic influence on autonomic centres in the brain
stem [257]. In steady state conditions, most of the tear volume is
derived from the lacrimal gland and its osmolarity therefore re-
flects that of the lacrimal secretion, modified by exposure to the
environment when the eyes are open. A longer blink interval is
predicted to result in a greater rise in the osmolarity of the pre￾ocular tear film and meniscus than a shorter blink interval.
4.9.3.3. Sensory drive to blinking. Spontaneous blinks are thought
to arise through the activity of a brainstem ‘blink generator’,
modified by reflex inputs from the ocular surface and inputs from
higher centres. Details of the blink generator are not fully known
but it may lie in the pontomedullary reticular formation and the
medullary reticular nucleus which serve both the facial nucleus and
third nerve nuclei. Blink rate falls after bilateral, topical, ocular
anesthesia [258], and also following LASIK surgery [259].
4.9.3.4. The blink cycle and tear dynamics. The tear film is regularly
refreshed by spontaneous blinking, [258,260] whose rate is adapted
to environmental conditions and varies with personal behavior.
Blinking plays a key role in tear dynamics by spreading, mixing, and
distributing the tears and clearing cellular and other debris. The
blink cycle consists of the blink itself (around 200e300 ms) and the
blink interval, during which evaporative water loss occurs [261].
The blink rate is expressed in blinks per minute.
4.9.3.5. The blink rate. Wide variations in blink rate have been re￾ported in normal adults, probably reflecting individual variation
and the influence of environmental and experimental conditions. It
is strongly influenced by mental state, attention, physical activity,
eye exposure, and environment. Factors in the environment that
are important are relative humidity, temperature and airflow over
the eye. Blink rate is increased by low humidity, cold and high wind
speeds.
In standard room conditions (eg. 22  C with humidity of 40.0%),
blink rate in normal adults ranges between 15 and 20 per min
[261e263]. Blink rate increases in DED, where it is thought to play a
compensatory role in refreshing the tear film more frequently
[264,265]. Blink rate falls during a number of common visual tasks
requiring mental concentration, and it is considered that the
increased evaporative loss may act as a trigger for DED [261].
4.10. Optical performance of the tear film
Wavefront aberrometry studies show that, in healthy eyes, optical
quality of the tear film decreases steadily during the blink interval.
The period over which this occurs is shorter in DED, with the aber￾ration minimum just preceding the breakup of the tear film [266].
4.11. Tear osmolarity
4.11.1. Introduction
Tear film osmolarity is a central factor in the pathogenesis of
both ADDE and EDE. Tear hyperosmolority resulting from
decreased lacrimal flow or tear film breakup contribute to ocular
surface damage both directly, and indirectly, through a cascade of
inflammatory events. This hyperosmolar inflammatory environ￾ment favors corneal and conjunctival epithelial, and goblet cell
apoptosis which further contributes to tear film instability.
Inflammation induced by tear film instability and hyperosmolarity
also contributes to neurogenic chronic inflammation and increased
disease severity [267,268].
In subjects with normal eyes, in standard conditions, tear os￾molarity, measured in lower meniscus samples, lies within narrow
limits and is remarkably stable in healthy eyes [269]. Evaporation
during the blink interval causes a measureable thinning of the tear
film, and a consequent rise in tear film osmolarity is predicted
[177]. Tomlinson reported a value of 302 ± 9.7 mOsm/L based on
data from several studies [270] and importantly, variation between
right and left eyes is small (6.9 ± 5.9 mOsm/L) [271]. The narrow
range of values in individuals reflects the influence of homeostatic
mechanisms, with the blink interval, as the chief modifier of
evaporation, likely determining the set point of tear osmolarity
between the two eyes [79b].
Mathematical modeling suggests that there is a small osmolar
differential between the tears and menisci so that in the steady
state, the osmolarity of the tear film is higher than that of the
menisci [176]. This may relate to the ratio of the tear film thickness
to its surface area, compared with that of the menisci, and to tear
mixing and flow in the menisci in the early phase of the interblink
interval [272]. Modeling considerations also suggest that in DED,
this differential is greater. Thus a tear sample taken from the
meniscus may under-estimate that of the tears over the surface of
the eye and hence of the underlying tissues [176].
While the highest values for tear meniscus osmolarity measured
in DED are below 500 mOsm/l, it is likely that levels achieved at the
ocular surface are much higher than this, particularly at the site of
tear film breakup. Begley and colleagues studied the relationship
between tear film breakup and DED and have suggested that local
fluctuations in the tear film thickness will induce hyperosmolarity
“hot-spots” with significantly higher concentrations than the
average tear value [273e275]. Liu et al. [276], compared the char￾acter and intensity of symptoms associated with tear film breakup
with those induced by instilled hyperosmolar solutions. These
studies indicated a threshold of 450 mOsm/l for the induction of
symptoms, with a value of 800e900 mOsm/l required to mimic
symptoms induced by tear film breakup, that is, far higher than that
detected in the meniscus in DED patients. Recent mathematical
modeling also predicts major spikes in osmolarity within regions of
tear breakup [277e279].
Tear film thickness was studied by using the self-quenching of
fluorescein (FL), the reduction of fluorescent efficiency with
increasing concentration shown at high concentrations [280]. Close
match between FL imaging and a mathematical model incorpo￾rating evaporation and osmosis predicted the osmolarity of the
uniformly thinning tear film to be as high as 3000 mOsM. The peak
values of osmolarity varied depending on the evaporation rate
applied in the model. The mathematical model simulated osmo￾larity within and around areas of tear breakup yielding a peak os￾molarity value of approximately 1900 mOsM, close to modeling
results of Peng et al. [279] (Fig. 4). These local spikes of hyper￾osmolarity within areas of tear breakup are considered to be a
major source of repeated stress to the ocular surface.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 448
4.11.2. Tear osmolarity in dry eye
Tear osmolarity threshold values that discriminate a healthy eye
from an eye with DED varies in the literature from 308 mOsm/L to
316 mOsm/L [269,270]. One reported reason for variability in tear
osmolarity threshold values is tear film instability, a characteristic
of the disease. Normal, mild/moderate, and severe dry eyes have
average tear osmolarity values of approximately 302 ± 8 mOsm/L,
315 ± 10 mOsm/L and 336 ± 022 mOsm/L, respectively [281].
Currently, 308 mOsm/L is proposed as a sensitive threshold for
discriminating between normal eyes and those presenting with
early stages of DED. Conversely, the 316 mOsm/L threshold would
better discriminate between mild and moderate/severe DED. In
addition to the absolute level of tear osmolarity, variability over
time and, particularly, variability between the two eyes, can be a
diagnostic indicator and appear to increase with the severity of DED
[269,282].
4.11.3. Factors influencing tear osmolarity
Tear osmolarity is influenced by the following intrinsic and
extrinsic factors: i. Body hydration, ii. Tear film lipid layer (TFLL)
characteristics, iii Palpebral aperture width, iv. Blink interval, v. Tear
film stability and, vi. Environmental conditions.
4.11.4. Body hydration
The tears on waking are slightly hypotonic, their tonicity rising
over the course of the day, due to evaporation from the tear film.
There is a positive relationship between whole body hydration,
measured as plasma osmolarity and tear osmolarity and both are
raised in patients with DED. Also, tear osmolarity follows plasma
osmolarity in subjects with imposed systemic dehydration
[283e285]. Consequently measurement of tear osmolarity has
been proposed as a possible surrogate for plasma osmolarity, of
potential use in the rapid detection of dehydration in the elderly or
in sports medicine [283].
4.11.5. The tear film lipid layer
The rate of water loss from the eye is influenced by the quality
and thickness of the TFLL. Expression of meibum in normal eyes
leads to thickening of the tear film lipid layer [286] and to a
reduction of evaporation in both healthy individuals and patients
with DED [287]. When the quality or integrity of the TFLL is defi-
cient, as judged by interferometry, evaporative loss may be
increased and tear osmolarity increased [175]. A similar outcome
may be predicted when TFLL spreading is retarded by a marked
aqueous tear deficiency [194].
4.11.6. Palpebral aperture width
As would be anticipated, evaporative loss from the eye is
influenced by tear film area. Tsubota and Nakamori examined the
effect of gaze position on evaporation rate (at 40% humidity and a
blink rate of 30 per min) and showed that evaporative loss is 3.4
and 2.5 times greater when looking up and straight ahead than
when looking down, not only per eye, but also per unit area of the
ocular surface [288], perhaps suggesting that as the area to be
covered increases, the TFLL is thinned.
4.11.7. Blink interval
The tear film is refreshed by blinking [258] and the blink rate is
adapted to environmental and social circumstance and to personal
behavior. The blink interval, and hence the blink rate, is a deter￾minant of tear osmolarity, with the expectation that prolongation
of the interval (a slower blink rate) will raise it. Blink behavior may
be constrained while performing selected visual tasks in ways that
influence tear stability and evaporative loss. A fall in blink rate has
been documented during everyday visual tasks, such as working at
a video display terminal, reading in downgaze [289], operating
monitor-based and handheld video games, and performing surgery
[290,291]. In these situations, both gaze position and difficulty of
the visual task are determinants of blink rate.
The effect of a fall in blink rate on evaporative stress while
performing downgaze tasks is difficult to predict on basic princi￾ples. Both blink rate and palpebral aperture area are decreased, the
former tending to increase and the latter to decrease tear evapo￾ration. Also, when viewing computers with the eyes in the primary
position, the head may tilt backwards, thus narrowing the palpe￾bral aperture.
4.11.8. Tear film breakup
The importance of a stable tear film for retinal imaging is well
known [292], and many approaches are used to study its influence
on visual function. Tear film breakup within the blink interval is a
cause of visual degradation and its character and time course have
been studied in detail in contact lens wearers [293]. The effect of
precorneal tear film breakup on vision is due to variations in film
thickness, rupture of the film and, in DED, exposed epithelial ir￾regularities at the site of breakup and the presence of light￾scattering, epithelial opacities.
Although visual acuity is the standard clinical measure of visual
function, it does not provide a full account of visual performance
and broader measures of visual function are used, such as contrast
sensitivity [292], glare disability [294], and scatter index [295], all
of which have been shown to be disturbed in DED [296]. A func￾tional measure of visual acuity has also been developed [297,298].
Tear film breakup time is the most frequently used measure of
tear film stability and becomes of pathological importance when it
falls below the interblink interval. In most healthy individuals, the
tear film is extremely stable and values reported for TBUT are well
beyond the normal blink interval [299]. However, tear breakup in
the blink interval does occur in some healthy individuals.
The relationship between the blink interval and breakup time
can be captured as the Ocular Protection Index (OPI), the breakup
time divided by the blink interval [300]. An OPI of  1, indicates that
the breakup time exceeds the blink interval and therefore that the
eye is protected from desiccation throughout the blink cycle. An OPI
Fig. 4. Predicted evolution of a spike of hyperosmolarity during an extended blink
interval based on modeling considerations. Surface osmolarity increases from 300
mOsM to 545 and 850 after 10 and 20 s, respectively, and skyrockets to 1534 mOsM
after a 33-s interblink corresponding to tear-film breakup. (from Peng, C. C., et al.
(2014). “Evaporation-driven instability of the precorneal tear film.” Advances in colloid
and interface science 206: 250e264. e with permission) [279].
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 449
of <1 indicates that breakup is occurring within the interblink in￾terval and that the eye is exposed to damaging desiccation. In early
DED, OPI is initially >1 and nears 1 as disease severity increases,
independent of the cause of the DED. Later, as the disease pro￾gresses and the OPI falls below 1, hyperosmolarity is amplified
locally in the epithelium subjacent to the breakup by the local in￾crease in evaporation. For a given blink interval, the lower the OPI,
the greater the imposition of evaporative hyperosmolarity at the
ocular surface. In the regions outside the area of breakup, osmo￾larity is also increased, by diffusion and tear mixing, but to a more
modest level.
It is evident that the measurement of tear osmolarity in tear
meniscus samples underestimates the level of hyperosmolar stress
delivered to the ocular surface in an individual dry eye, and the
Subcommittee identified a need to develop techniques for the
measurement of osmolarity across the ocular surface, at the tissue
level. Some success has been reported in the mouse, measuring
surface cation levels by fluorescence ratio imaging [301] and at￾tempts have been made in the clinical situation, measuring tear
[302] and tissue conductivity [303], but currently no clinical in￾strument is available.
Local tear instability, initiated by a loss of ocular surface
wettability, such as occurs in xerophthalmia and chronic topical
preservative use, can be an independent starting point for tear
hyperosmolarity and DED, acting through the mechanism
described above. The resulting DED was earlier referred to as an
“extrinsic” form of EDE, but a better term is ocular surface-related
EDE.
4.11.9. Effect of ambient environment
Certain environmental conditions increase evaporative loss and
are risk factors for DED. Evaporation is increased in conditions of
low humidity and increased airflow over the surface of the eye
[261,304,305]. Such conditions may be combined and may also
occur in natural, outdoor conditions. The effect of the environment
on evaporation is the basis for providing goggles or water￾conserving spectacles for the prevention or treatment of DED
states. Exposure to low humidity environment for as little as 90 min
has been shown to increase blink rate, ocular discomfort and the
presence of cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in
tears [264,306].
4.12. Corneal epithelial barrier disruption
4.12.1. Matrix metalloproteinases and EMMPRIN
Disruption of the epithelial barrier at the ocular surface is a
characteristic feature of DED. Exposure of the corneal epithelium to
increased osmolarity promotes inflammation, abnormal differen￾tiation, programmed cell death (e.g. apoptosis) and accelerated
desquamation [307], with early activation of mitogen activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear factor KB (NFkB) stress signaling
pathways [308,309]. These pathways initiate a cascade of events,
including transcriptional activation of genes encoding inflamma￾tory matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) (particularly MMP-9) and
pro-apoptotic factors [310e312].
MMPs are proteolytic enzymes, involved in wound healing and
inflammation, which play a key role in DED pathogenesis by dis￾rupting intercellular epithelial tight junctions, leading to a break￾down of the epithelial barrier. Expression and production of
MMPs  1,  3,  9, and  13 by human corneal epithelial cells cor￾relates positively with increasing osmolarity [310e312], acting, at
least in part, through the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway
[308]. This activity is inhibited by doxycycline [313]. Among these
proteases, MMP-9 is considered to be of central importance in the
response to hyperosmolar stress [311,314]. Occludin, a component
of the tight junction is a known substrate of this protease and, in a
murine model of DED, increased tear levels of MMP-9 were asso￾ciated with a loss of epithelial barrier function and surface
epithelial regularity [314,315]. Increased MMP-9 levels were also
observed in the tear fluid of patients with DED, with the concen￾tration of MMP-9 in tears correlating with DED severity. Therefore
its quantification has been proposed as a biological marker of dis￾ease activity [316e318]. It is relevant that MMP-9 knockout mice
exposed to desiccating stress are more resistant to alterations of the
corneal epithelial barrier than wild-type animals [315].
The membrane-spanning molecule EMMPRIN (Extracellular
MMP inducer; also termed CDþ147) is an inducer of MMP expres￾sion that participates in the pathogenesis of DED through MMP￾mediated cleavage of occludin [314]. The molecule is also
involved in the pathogenesis of corneal ulceration, stromal melting
and stromal remodeling [314,319]. EMMPRIN expression is
increased at the ocular surface in DED patients and correlates with
MMP-9 levels in tears and in corneal epithelial cell cultures [314].
Increased osmolarity or addition of recombinant EMMPRIN in
corneal epithelial cell conditioned medium was responsible for
increasing production of both EMMPRIN and MMP-9 and resulted
in the disruption of epithelial junctions through the cleavage of
occludin. Conversely, selective inhibition of EMMPRIN by siRNA in
this system, leads to the inhibition of both MMP-9 induction and
epithelial barrier disruption. Moreover, an inverse relationship
between the distribution of occludin and EMMPRIN as a function of
differentiation and stratification of epithelial cells, both in culture,
and in the stratified corneal epithelium in vivo, suggests a physio￾logical function for this molecule in epithelial cell barrier homeo￾stasis. Interestingly, unpreserved artificial tears have been shown to
decrease EMMPRIN cell surface expression in patients with DED,
and addition of cyclosporine to corneal epithelial cell conditioned
medium, inhibited cell surface expression of EMMPRIN selectively,
in an in vitro model of ocular surface preservative toxicity [314,320].
Galectin-3 is required to maintain the barrier function of
epithelial glycocalyx [321]. Its levels are increased in the tears of
DED patients, associated with increased levels of MMP-9 [155]. In
an in vitro corneal epithelial cell system, the cellecell detachment
and redistribution of occludin induced by exogenous galectin-3 is
considered to involve the induction of MMP-9, a process dependent
on the clustering and interaction of galectin-3 with EMMPRIN on
the cell surface [321].
4.13. Frictional events at the surface of the eye
Friction between the lids and globe as they move in relation to
each other during blinking and eye movements is considered to be
a cause of symptoms in DED and its sources have been reviewed by
Pult [322]. Frictional symptoms will occur only at times of such
relative movement between the lids and the globe.
When two apposed surfaces are in relative motion, the degree of
friction between them depends on the nature of the surfaces, the
speed of movement, the load applied and the presence of lubrica￾tion. Where the surfaces are separated by a fluid layer, lubrication is
referred to as hydrodynamic, whereas where they are in direct
contact, this is termed boundary lubrication [101,323e325] An in￾termediate, mixed state also exists [326]. Suitable lubrication can
diminish the degree of damage or wear engendered by frictional
forces.
4.13.1. Boundary lubrication
Boundary lubrication usually applies when the relative motion
between apposed surfaces is slow, which, for the ocular surface, is
during the interblink interval when the eyes are stationary, or
directed at slow-moving objects. It probably also occurs at the
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 450
beginning, end and return points of the blink cycle [325]. At this
time the epithelial glycocalyces of the apposed tarsus and globe are
in contact, with a variable amount of the mucoaqueous phase
intervening. In these circumstances, the cross-linked mucin exo￾domains of the healthy glycocalyx act as hydrophilic polymer
brushes, which greatly lower the coefficient of friction between the
apposed surfaces of lid and globe and minimise frictional damage
[327,328].
4.13.1.1. Lubricin
Lubricin, or proteoglycan 4, is an amphiphilic glycoprotein
expressed by synovial and cartilage cells of the joints, as well as in
the major viscera and in muscle, tendon and bone and the eye and
brain [82]. In the joints, cooperating with hyaluronic acid, it acts as
an efficient boundary lubricant, reducing friction between the
apposed joint surfaces [82,329e331]. In other tissues it may serve
other physiological functions involving cell proliferation and
attachment and matrix binding.
In the eye, lubricin is expressed by trabecular meshwork cells
and by the corneal and conjunctival epithelium. Lubricin
messenger RNA is also present in lacrimal and meibomian glands
[82,330]. Laboratory studies suggest that lubricin may function as a
boundary lubricant between the apposed surface of the cornea and
lid wiper region [82]. Absence of lubricin in PRG4 knockout (KO)
mice is associated with a significant increase in corneal fluorescein
staining. Recombinant lubricin has been synthesized successfully
[332] and has recently been tested in a clinical trial for the treat￾ment of DED [333].
4.13.2. Hydrodynamic lubrication
Hydrodynamic lubrication applies in conditions of high relative
velocity where a fluid layer separates the apposed surfaces. For the
tarsus and globe, this occurs during the blink and during saccades.
During the downphase of the blink, the upper lid moves chiefly in a
vertical direction but also slightly nasally, across the exposed globe
with an average velocity of 17e28 cm s 1 and a maximum velocity of
around 40 cm s 1 [322,334]. The lower lid moves nasally, about
4.5 ± 0.9 mm and slightly upwards. The width of the palpebral
aperture is also reduced [322]. During saccades, movement is be￾tween the tarsus and the unexposed surfaces of the globe. In vertical
gaze there is more limited relative movement between the upper lid
and globe.
The relationship between friction and velocity, load and viscosity,
is described by the Stribeck curve [200,335,336]. This empirical
relationship was originally characterized for steel journal bearings
using oil lubrication, with the friction coefficient on the y axis and
the Hersey number (viscosity*sliding velocity/normal pressure) on
the x axis. Many biological surfaces are soft, complex, heterogeneous
hydrated materials (such as the cornea and lid tissue) and therefore
may not follow classic Stribeck behavior [337], yet the curve can still
provide a framework for discussion and interpretation.
According to the Stribeck curve, where tear volume is sufficient,
then friction during blinking depends on the rate of relative
movement of the apposed surfaces and the tear viscosity. Given
that S ¼ (v・h)/t where S ¼ shear friction, v is the velocity of the
upper lid during the blink, h is the viscosity of the tears and t is the
thickness of the tear layer between the apposed surfaces.
The above equation suggests that for a given tear viscosity, the
thicker the tear film, the lower friction will be. For a Newtonian
fluid whose viscosity is independent of shear rate, hydrodynamic
friction increases with increasing viscosity and this may be relevant
to events in DED (see below), but normal tears behave as a non￾Newtonian fluid [338e340] whose viscosity falls with increasing
shear rate (i.e. it shear-thins), so that this consideration does not
apply. Therefore, according to this relationship, while
acknowledging that the Stribeck curve classically applies to non￾porous stiff materials, assumptions can be made. With friction
during blinking/saccades depending on the rate of relative move￾ment and tear viscosity, when tear volume is sufficient, the coef-
ficient of friction between lid and globe may be assumed to be low.
It is suggested that there is a rapid transition from brush-to-brush
or boundary lubrication, to hydrodynamic lubrication with
increasing velocity during the blink [322]. The lid margin profile
may also be important in the transition from boundary to hydro￾dynamic lubrication [322].
Friction is greatly increased in DED states due to a failure of
lubrication [341], with the loss of mucin gel and glycocalyx or, in
ADDE, of fluid volume. This may cause damage to specific sites, as
observed in lid wiper epitheliopathy (LWE) [342], parallel
conjunctival folds, (LIPCOF) [343a], and superior limbic kerato￾conjunctivitis (SLK).
4.13.3. Frictional forces at the lid-wiper region of the lid
The lid-wiper region of the lid was originally described as that
portion of the upper eyelid that comes into intimate contact with the
globe and wipes over it during blinking [342,344a]. This role had
earlier been conceived by Parsons [345] and by Ehlers [323], based on
the recognition of a ‘stratified squamous’ epithelium at this site. It is
now recognised to be a feature of both the upper and lower lid [346].
The upper lid wiper consists of an elevated strip of marginal
conjunctival epithelium, 100 mm thick, varying in width from 0.3 to
1.5 mm and extending the full length of the lid margin at the level
of Riolan's muscle. According to Knop it is composed of a stratified
cuboidal epithelium [40], which is closely applied to the globe
during the blink [326,347] and is probably the closest region of
contact between the upper, and presumably, the lower, lid and
globe. In the upper lid, the tarsal mucosa lying proximal to this
zone, and separated from the globe by a mucoaqueous layer of
unknown thickness, (within ‘Kessing's space’) [36,97] is thought to
be less closely applied. The presence of both goblet cells and goblet
cell crypts in the lid wiper epithelium [40,101] is presumed to
provide a local, mucinous lubrication system at this point of pri￾mary contact, of importance during blinking and to a lesser extent
during eye movements where the forces applied are lower.
4.13.4. The consequences of shearing forces at the ocular surface
At a conservative estimate, considering a blink rate of 12 times a
minute over a 16 h day, an individual would blink 11,000 times in
the course of a day and, assuming a palpebral aperture of 10 mm in
height, the lid wiper would have travelled a distance of at least
100 m over the surface of the cornea [101]. Notwithstanding the
presence of a lubricating system of high quality, this is a source of
shear stress at the ocular surface. It is presumed to play a role in
epithelial desquamation, in the punctate epithelial staining found
at the ocular surface in the normal eye and in the enhanced
punctate epithelial staining of DED. Additionally, as noted, it con￾tributes to other clinical features of DED such LWE LIPCOF and SLK,
any of which may occur, in lesser degree, in the absence of DED.
4.14. Epithelial desquamaton
The following scenario, referring to the cornea, may be proposed
for the shedding of epithelial cells. A similar process is assumed for
the conjunctiva [348]. Epithelial cells arise by the division of stem
cells at the corneal limbus and are increased in number by division
of transient amplifying cells, in the periphery [349]. Newly formed
cells undergo terminal differentiation as they migrate centripetally
and to the surface and after a period of residence, undergo a process
that leads to shedding, which may be preceded by apoptosis [350].
Epithelial desquamation involves uncoupling of layer 1 cells from
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 451
neighbouring cells, with a loss of junctions, including tight junc￾tions and adherens junctions, and dissolution of the apical glyco￾calyx. At some point, having lost adherence to surrounding cells,
the cell destined for shedding is easily displaced by frictional forces.
Its place is taken by a younger cell, already equipped with a
maturing glycocalyx, which is rapidly integrated with neighbouring
cells by means of tight junction formation, thereby restoring the
functional integrity of the surface. It is this process that most likely
explains the infrequent occurrence of punctate epithelial staining
in the normal eye.
4.14.1. Physiological punctate epithelial staining
The subject of punctate epithelial staining has been recently
reviewed [348]. A low degree of punctate epithelial staining is a
regular finding on the normal cornea and conjunctiva after the
instillation of dyes such as fluorescein, lissamine green and rose
bengal and may be regarded as a physiological phenomenon. Based
on reports in the literature it occurs with a frequency of 4e78%
[351], varying with methods of assessment, particularly with vol￾ume and concentration of dye instilled and the period of observa￾tion. The number of staining points increases with time in the post￾instillation period. Punctate epithelial staining on the cornea and
conjunctiva, with a characteristic horizontal, interpalpebral
pattern, is a diagnostic feature of DED.
In normal subjects, a proportion of corneas show a low level of
punctate staining immediately after fluorescein instillation
[351e356]. A ‘clinically significant’ grade of fluorescein staining has
been reported to occur in about 12% of non-contact lens wearers
[357e359] but the figure rises if ‘clinical significance’ is ignored e
eg. from 37% to 58%, in the study of Korb [353]. Similarly, in a study
of normal subjects (median 22 years; range 18e50 years) after the
instillation of fluorescein from a an impregnated strip, 79% of
subjects showed some degree of corneal staining. Less information
is available about the conjunctiva.
Norn reported the frequency of punctate epithelial staining in
the normal cornea, read at 1e2 min following the instillation of a
10 ml of 0.125% fluorescein. Punctate staining was present in 4% of
subjects under 40 years of age, increasing to 20% above the age of
50 years, after which the frequency became stable. The mean fre￾quency for the group overall (n ¼ 411) was 17% [360]. Similarly, the
number of dots per cornea rose with age, although in most subjects
the number of dots per cornea was small, with only 1% of subjects
showing over 100 dots per cornea, compared to 35% with over 1000
staining dots in patients with DED (Table 4).
In general, the prevalence of staining and dot frequency, in￾creases with dye concentration [360], with time after drop instil￾lation [353] and with age of the subject [360,361]. Caffery and
Josephson showed that the regional pattern of corneal staining was
individual to the subject, similar in fellow eyes, and, importantly,
varied from day to day [356], which was confirmed by Schwallie
et al. [362] They concluded that variation might relate to the natural
turnover of the epithelium.
The physiological occurrence of corneal and conjunctival stain￾ing suggests that in clinical trials, for instance of DED therapies,
zero corneal staining is not a reasonable criterion to define recovery
to full corneal health. Also, the time-dependent staining of the
normal corneal epithelium and dependence on instilled concen￾trations, emphasizes the need for standardization of staining rou￾tines to assess ocular surface damage.
4.14.2. Mechanism of punctate epithelial staining in normal and in
dry eyes
The mechanism that determines punctate epithelial staining has
been in debate for over half a century and has been addressed by
several recent reviews [79a]. There appears to be no direct evidence
that punctate dots of stain represent pools of dye lying within
spaces left by shed cells, hence the term punctate epithelial erosion
is not appropriate [363e365]. Rather, it seems that each dot of stain
represents the uptake of dye into a surface epithelial cell.
4.14.3. Staining in the normal eye
Epithelial cells are shed daily from the ocular surface and about
75% of collected cells are corneal [366]. Cells are shed in a diurnal
pattern, with more cells shed in the morning and the latter part of
the day [367]. About 23% are ghost cells, lacking nuclei, considered
to be at a late stage of cell differentiation [368,369]. This is
consistent with an earlier study showing the presence of both
viable (calcein-positive only) and nonviable (ethidium-positive
only) epithelial cells, as well as an intermediate cell type that
stained with both calcein and ethidium [367].
The vast majority of layer 1 epithelial cells do not take up dye,
whereas shed epithelial cells, trapped in the fornical mucus thread,
stain with rose bengal [203], as do immature human limbal corneal
epithelial cells grown in culture [370,371]. Similarly, cultured rabbit
corneal epithelial cells stain avidly with fluorescein [372,373].
Argueso et al. resolved this issue by demonstrating that exclusion of
rose bengal from entry into surface epithelial cells in the intact eye,
depends on the presence of a mature glycocalyx expressing MUC1
and MUC 16 mucins, crosslinked by galectin-3 [128,134,148]. The
mature glycocalyx forms a barrier to transmembrane dye entry into
the layer 1 epithelial cells, while entry into the paracellular space is
restricted by intercellular, tight junctions. Bandamwar et al.
[350,374] have presented evidence that staining cells are those
undergoing apoptosis while preparing for shedding. Such cells
possess a defective glycocalyx layer, which is permeable to dyes in
clinical use. Once shed, all epithelial cells are incompletely clad
with glycocalyx and hence stain readily.
It is hypothesized that the permeability of a cell that is preparing
for shedding, increases over time, due to chemical and structural
changes in its glycocalyx, so that those cells that are just about to be
shed take up stain almost immediately whereas those that are at an
earlier stage of preparation, take up stain more slowly. This is pre￾sumed to be the basis of the effect of dye concentration or of period
of observation, on the frequency of physiological staining dots.
5. The pathology of dry eye disease
These introductory remarks are intended to arm the reader to
understand the events responsible for the many forms of DED.
5.1. Introduction
The TFOS DEWS [1] report confirmed tear hyperosmolarity,
along with tear instability, as the core drivers of DED. This allowed
two major subtypes to be defined, EDE, where tear hyperosmolarity
Table 4
Micropunctate staining dots per cornea after instillation of fluorescein.
Dots per cornea Percent with 0.125%
fluorescein
Percent with 1.0%
fluorescein
Zero 83 27
1e4 9 16
5e94 2
10e25 3 4
25e99 1/2 0
100e999 1 16

1000 0 35
Percentage of normal corneas showing a given number of micropunctate staining
dots per cornea, after instillation of 10 ml of either 0.125% or 1% fluorescein (in
combination with 1% rose bengal) (n ¼ 411, including fellow eyes). Staining was
read more than 1e2 min following dye instillation (From references 348, 360).
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 452
is the result of an excessive evaporation from the tear film in the
presence of normal lacrimal function and ADDE, where hyper￾osmolarity results from a reduced lacrimal secretion in the pres￾ence of a normal rate of tear evaporation (Table 5). The tear film
lipid deficiency that accompanies MGD is cited as a typical cause of
EDE and the reduced tear secretion due to lacrimal gland damage in
age-related DED provides a typical example of ADDE. It was rec￾ognised that these subtypes of DED may coexist and this is the case
in Sjogren syndrome where lacrimal de € ficiency frequently coexists
with MGD [375,376,1201]. Also, in any form of cicatricial conjunc￾tivitis, DED may be secondary to a lacrimal tear deficiency, a tear
lipid deficiency and loss of ocular surface wettability.
Other forms of hybrid DED may also be conceived, in which
organic disease of one type may be combined with a functional
form of DED of another type [207]. For example in severe EDE, loss
of corneal sensitivity could remove the compensatory drive to
lacrimal secretion and lead to a secondary, functional aqueous
deficiency. Or in ADDE, a severe reduction in tear film thickness
could impair TFLL spreading and give rise to a secondary, functional
EDE. Additionally and importantly, it may be observed that in any
form of DED, once tear breakup occurs within the blink interval, an
additional evaporative component is added to the dry eye,
regardless of the initiating cause. A consequence of this is that a dry
eye that is initiated by a lacrimal tear deficiency becomes an
ADDE þ EDE as it evolves. It follows that, where comparisons of tear
evaporation rate are made between forms of DED classically
defined as ADDE and EDE, the OPI should be taken into account.
This also has implications for therapy and for subgroup selection
and analysis in clinical trials. This Subcommittee recommends that
the terms EDE and ADDE be retained to describe the initiating basis
of a dry eye but that it should be recognised that with progression
any form of DED may take on additional evaporative features.
It should be kept in mind that, in a sense, all forms of DED are
evaporative, since without evaporation, tear hyperosmolarity
cannot occur. Consequently, environment and personal behavior
are contributors to ocular surface hyperosmolarity, including
external factors such as ambient humidity, temperature and wind
speed and personal factors such as blink rate and lid aperture size,
gaze position and the influence of systemic medication on tear
secretion. The Subcommittee discussed the term, ‘hyper￾evaporative dry eye’ as a better way of indicating the role of
increased evaporation in DED.
A major contribution of the TFOS DEWS report [1] was the
proposition that every kind of dry eye, however initiated, enters a
final common pathway in which tear hyperosmolarity and a chain
of inflammatory events create a Vicious Circle that perpetuates the
DED state [377]. According to this approach, any etiology of DED will
have one or more entry points into the Vicious Circle. The concept of
the Vicious Circle is illustrated in (Fig. 5) and is elaborated in the
text that follows.
5.2. The Vicious Circle of dry eye
In the simplest model of DED, with tear hyperosmolarity as its
the starting point, the pathological process is propagated by a chain
of events that lead to ocular surface damage (Fig. 5). Initially this
gives rise to symptoms and compensatory responses, but it also
generates inflammatory responses that ultimately lead to chronic
ocular surface damage and self-perpetuated disease [377].
This may be summarised as follows:
As noted earlier, tear hyperosmolarity stimulates a cascade of
events in the epithelial cells of the ocular surface, involving MAP
kinases and NFkB signaling pathways [311] and the generation of
inflammatory cytokines (IL-1 [IL-1a; IL-1b]); tumor necrosis factor￾a [TNF-a]) and proteases, such as MMP9 [378]. These activate and
Table 5
Causes of dry eye disease.
AQUEOUS-DEFICIENT DRY EYE (ADDE)
Sjogren Syndrome Dry Eye (SSDE) €
- associated systemic diseases
Rheumatoid arthritis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Systemic lupus erythematosis
Wegener granulomatosis
Systemic sclerosis
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Mixed connective tissue disease
Non- Sjogren Syndrome Dry Eye (NSDE) €
Intrinsic Lacrimal Gland Deficiency
Lacrimal gland ablation
Congenital alacrima
Triple A syndrome
Age-related ADDE dry eye
Inflammatory and Other Lacrimal Gland infiltration
Sarcoidosis
Lymphoma
Viral Infection
Radiation Injury
Lacrimal Gland Obstruction
Cicatricial Conjunctivitis
GVHD
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/TEN
Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid
Cicatricial pemphigoid
Pemphigus
Trachoma
Chemical injury
Hyposecretory States e Failure of the Lacrimal Functional Unit
Reflex Afferent Block
Topical anesthesia
Trigeminal nerve injury
Refractive surgery
Neurotrophic keratitis
Secretomotor Block
Parasympathetic damage
Pharmacological inhibition
Combined Afferent and Efferent Block
Familial dysautonomia
Other Disorders
Meige Syndrome
Diabetes Mellitus
Pseudoexfoliation
EVAPORATIVE DRY EYE
Meibomian Gland Diseases
Lid-Related
Meibomian Gland Dysfunction (MGD)
Primary
Meibomian seborrhea
Obstructive MGD
Cicatricial/non-cicatricial
Secondary to Local Disease
Anterior blepharitis
Ocular surface inflammation
Contact lens wear
Secondary to Systemic Dermatoses
Rosacea
Seborrheic dermatitis
Atopic dermatitis
Icthyosis
Psoriasis
Secondary to Chemical Exposure
13-cis retinoic acid
Polychlorinated biphenols
Antiandrogens
Genetically Determined Meibomian Gland Diseases
Meibomian Agenesis and Dystichiasis
Anhydrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia
Ectrodactyly Syndrome
Epidermolysis Bullosa
Ichthyosis Follicularis
Turner Syndrome;
Disorders of Lid Aperture, Congruity, Dynamics
Blink-Related
(continued on next page)
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 453
recruit inflammatory cells to the ocular surface, which become an
additional source of inflammatory mediators [379]. Such
mediators, acting with tear hyperosmolarity itself, lead to a reduced
expression of glycocalyx mucins, to apoptotic death of surface
epithelial cells [380] and to a loss of goblet cells. Hyperosmolarity
also induces corneal epithelial cell death through non-apoptotic
processes [62]. Goblet cell loss is a feature of every form of DED
[381,382], reflected by reduced tear levels of MUC5AC [383,384].
Altered expression of glycocalyx mucins is a likely basis for ocular
surface staining in DED and by compromising ocular surface wet￾ting, leads to early tear film breakup. This amplifies or initiates
ocular surface hyperosmolarity, which completes the Vicious Circle
Table 5 (continued )
Parkinson's Disease
Ocular Surface-Related Evaporative Dry Eye
Allergic Eye Disease
Vitamin A Deficiency
Short Breakup Time Dry Eye
Iatrogenic Disease
Fig. 5. The Vicious Circle of Dry Eye Disease. The core mechanism of DED is tear hyperosmolarity, which is the hallmark of the disease. It damages the ocular surface both directly
and by initiating inflammation. The cycle of events is shown at the centre of the figure. Two forms of DED are recognised, ADDE and EDE. In ADDE, tear hyperosmolarity results
when lacrimal secretion is reduced, in conditions of normal evaporation from the eye. In EDE, tear hyperosmolarity osmolarity is caused by excessive evaporation from the exposed
tear film in the presence of a normally functioning lacrimal gland. Since tear osmolarity can only rise as a result of tear evaporation in both ADDE and EDE, tear hyperosmolarity is
due to evaporation from the ocular surface and in that sense, all forms of DED are evaporative. EDE is a hyper-evaporative state. In DED, tear hyperosmolarity is considered to set up
a cascade of signaling events within surface epithelial cells, that leads to the release of inflammatory mediators and proteases. Such mediators, together with the tear hyper￾osmolarity itself, are conceived to cause goblet cell and epithelial cell loss and damage to the epithelial glycocalyx. Damage is reinforced by inflammatory mediators from activated
T-cells, recruited to the ocular surface. The net result is the characteristic punctate epitheliopathy of DED and a tear film instability which leads at some point to early tear film
break-up. This break-up exacerbates and amplifies tear hyperosmolarity and completes the Vicious Circle of events that lead to ocular surface damage. Ultimately this is thought to
lead to self-perpetuation of the disease. Tear film instability can be initiated without the prior occurrence of tear hyperosmolarity, by conditions that affect the ocular surface,
including xerophthalmia, ocular allergy, topical preservative use and contact lens wear. In this case, early tear film breakup (an Ocular Protection Index <1) is the primary basis for
tear film hyperosmolarity at first experienced locally at the site of breakup and increasing in severity, at some point being detectable in tear meniscus samples. This represents an
ocular surfaceerelated form of EDE. In MGD-related EDE tear hyperosmolarity results from a tear film lipid layer deficiency. In ADDE the onset of early break-up during the evolution
of the disease, may add an evaporative element to the dry eye. There are various causes of ADDE. It may result from blocking the sensory drive to the lacrimal gland that is essential
to maintain osmolar homeostasis. Bilateral topical anesthesia can cause both a reduction in tear secretion and blink rate. Dry eye due to such a reflex block can be caused by chronic
abuse of topical anesthetics, trigeminal nerve damage and refractive surgery including LASIK surgery. The delivery of aqueous tears to the tear sac can also be reduced by obstruction
of the lacrimal ducts, which can occur in any form of cicatricial conjunctival disease, such as trachoma, erythema multiforme, graft-versus-host-disease and chemical burns. A
number of drugs in systemic use, such as antihistamines, beta-blockers, antispasmodics, diuretics and some psychotropic drugs, cause a reduction in lacrimal secretion and are risk
factors for DED. Tear secretion rate falls in later life. The anti-glaucoma drugs pilocarpine and timolol also have direct effects on human meibomian gland epithelial cells that may
influence their morphology, survival and/or proliferative capacity, and possibly promote MGD [61,1103]. In the western world the most common cause of ADDE is inflammatory
infiltration of the lacrimal gland, encountered most severely in autoimmune disorders such as Sjogren syndrome dry eye (SSDE) and, with lesser severity, in non-Sjogren dry eye €
(NSDE). Inflammation causes both acinar and ductal epithelial cell dysfunction and/or destruction and a potentially reversible neurosecretory block. A receptor block may also be
caused by circulating antibodies to the muscarinic, M3 receptor. Inflammation is favoured by low tissue androgen levels. Epithelial injury and a defective glycocalyx, loss of tear
volume and of goblet cell mucin, lead to increased frictional damage and friction-related symptoms. The tear hyperosmolarity and epithelial injury caused by DED, stimulates
corneal nerve endings, leading to symptoms of discomfort, increased blink rate and, potentially, a compensatory reflex increase in lacrimal tear secretion. This compensatory
secretion is more likely in EDE, since lacrimal function is potentially normal. Adapted from Bron, Definition of dry eye disease’ in Chan 2015 - Springer [79b].
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 454
and establishes the mechanism that perpetuates the disease.
It has been emphasized by Baudouin et al. that the Vicious Circle
offers entry points for any cause of DED [385]; tear hyperosmolarity
need not be the starting point. Thus the chain of events leading to
tear film instability may be initiated by several different disorders,
including, but not limited to, ocular surface inflammation due to
allergic eye disease, topical preservative toxicity and loss of
conjunctival goblet cells or altered mucin expression, due to
xerophthalmia.
5.3. Compensatory events in dry eye
It is inherent to our current understanding of DED that exposure
of the ocular surface to desiccating stress sets up a compensatory,
secretory tear response, via the lacrimal functional unit that tends
to offset a rise in tear osmolarity and slow disease progression. As
summarised in the TFOS DEWS II Pain and Sensation report [1224],
both tear hyperosmolarity and surface cooling may trigger this
response. The cold modality fibres of the cornea are stimulated by
hyperosmolarity and could both increase the secretory drive to the
lacrimal gland and lead to an increased blink rate. Evaporative
cooling in EDE or in relation to early tear film breakup [279,386],
could add to this sensory drive. The finding of a reduced threshold
to sensory stimulation, in some DED patients [387], could amplify
these responses. Other authors have reported decreased corneal
sensitivity in DED [388,389], which may imply that, as DED pro￾gresses in severity, corneal sensation becomes impaired. In keeping
with this, a number of studies have reported a reduction in sub￾epithelial nerve density in DED [390]. Such a sequence could
impact unfavourably on compensatory responses and could
contribute to discrepancies between symptom intensity and
objective signs of DED. However, this possibility, which would be
important to our understanding of DED progression, has not been
addressed in long-term studies.
5.4. Symptoms
Any symptomatic disease goes through a subclinical phase in
which the features of the disease are not obvious and the patient is
symptom free. DED is no exception. (see the TFOS DEWS II Defini￾tion and Classification and Diagnostic Methodology report [1225])
But the burden of DED for the patient relates to symptoms and
there is now a greater understanding of their causes. DED affects
both vision and comfort of the eye. Potential sources of symptoms
in DED are listed in Table 6.
There is evidence to support a direct role for hyperosmolarity as
one basis for ocular discomfort in DED. As noted, instillation of
hyperosmolar drops causes pain of an intensity related to the level
of hyperosmolarity, but at levels far higher than that detected in
tear meniscus samples in DED patients [276]. Modeling consider￾ations have suggested that the levels of hyperosmolarity generated
at the site of tear breakup are far higher than in the tear meniscus
[279]. There is evidence too, that tear hyperosmolarity is initiated
as the tear film thins, and is amplified at the time of tear breakup
[391]. Additionally, several of those inflammatory mediators, which
have been demonstrated in the tears and ocular surface in DED, are
known to be algesic compounds, including various prostanoids,
cytokines and neurokinins. (see the TFOS DEWS II Pain and
Sensation report [1224] for further details). The loss of lubrication
between the globe and lids in DED has been suggested as a source
of friction-related outcomes, including a reduction in tear volume
in ADDE, loss of goblet cell gel mucin, degradation of glycocalyx
mucin [218] and loss of the boundary lubricant, lubricin [82]. Fila￾mentary keratitis is a particular source of pain, attributed to the
drag of filaments on nociceptor endings at the base of the filament
during blinking. A similar process may be responsible for symp￾toms of discomfort associated with LIPCOF [343a]. The basis for
pain associated with LWE is assumed to be due to hypersensitivity
over the affected region of the lid wiper and the region of the
keratopathy. In the healthy eye, this region of the lid margin has a
mechanical sensitivity similar to that of the central cornea [250].
Thus tear hyperosmolarity is but one of the potential sources of
discomfort in DED, another reason why the levels of tear osmolarity
measured in DED patients with chronic pain may not always be
significantly different from the osmolarity of asymptomatic pa￾tients [392].
Hypersensitivity (reduced threshold to stimulation) of corneal
nerves in DED patients may also explain the occurrence of ocular
discomfort at lower levels of tear osmolarity, due to exposure of
corneal nerve endings with loss of the epithelial barrier
[267,387,393].
Instillation of hyperosmolar drops within the ranges of osmo￾larity found in DED patients was shown to increase the sensitivity
of the cold nociceptive neurons and to induce DED signs in a rat
model. In this rat model, these nociceptors, which normally require
more than 2  C cooling, were activated by less than 1  C cooling of
the corneal surface when pretreated with hyperosmolar fluids
[394]. This phenomenon may explain the cooling-induced
discomfort and pain reported by DED patients. Upregulation of
TRPM8 channels or control of the voltage-gated potassium chan￾nels (Kv1.1) may be involved in this process [395]. Both channels
are well-established cooling sensors that can be regulated by a
hyperosmolar stimulus [396].
5.5. The ocular targets of dry eye disease
Clinical consequences at the ocular surface are independent of
etiology. These consequences may include punctate epitheliopathy,
filamentary keratitis, superior limbic keratitis, goblet cell loss,
modification of the epithelial glycocalyx, LIPCOF, changes to Marx's
line and MGD itself (Table 7). These are discussed below:
Table 6
Sources of dry eye symptoms.
i. Visual Symptoms e (occurring in the interblink interval)
Tear film instability and breakup
Epithelial roughness in regions of tear breakup
ii. Symptoms of Discomfort
Tear Hyperosmolarity
General e affecting all tear compartments
Local e tear breakup related, local hotspots of hyperosmolarity
iii. Friction - Reduced lubrication - (Related to blinking and eye movements)
Low tear volume in ADDE
Loss of goblet cells; mucin
Loss of mature glycocalyx, loss of lubricin
Rough epithelium; punctate epithelial keratitis
Filamentary keratitis
SLK
LIPCOF - conjunctivochalasis
LWE
iv. Inflammatory mediators
Algesic mediators increasing sensory excitability
Prostanoids
Cytokines
Neurokinins
v. Neurosensory and central factors
Trigeminal hypersensitivity;
Neuropathic firing
Cognitive aspects of dry eye symptoms
ADDE, aqueous deficient dry eye; SLK, superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis; LIPCOF,
lid parallel conjunctival folds; LWE, lid wiper epitheliopathy.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 455
5.5.1. The cornea
5.5.1.1. Punctate epitheliopathy and staining in dry eye disease.
Evidence suggests that noxious influences at the ocular surface in
DED lead to increased epithelial cell death (e.g. apoptosis) and
increased epithelial shedding and turnover. It is likely that
increased friction contributes to the increased shedding. No formal
measurements of increased shedding or turnover have been made
in DED and this would be of value.
Tabery has shown that punctate corneal epithelial staining in
DED can be explained by the uptake of dye directly into individual
epithelial cells and that fluorescein is taken up into the same cells
that take up rose bengal [397,398]. Several studies suggest that
staining cells on the cornea and conjunctiva have a defective gly￾cocalyx, including a deficiency of MUC 16, [399 401] and in bullous
keratopathy, too, superficial exfoliation and staining is associated
with breaches in MUC16 [402]. Komuro et al. found, in patients
with superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis, that areas of conjunctiva
showing positive staining with rose bengal, had no galectin-3
expression, whereas in healthy regions showing rose bengal
exclusion, galectin-3 was expressed normally [403].
The staining of individual, layer 1, corneal epithelial cells in DED
states is thus attributed to the diffusion of dye across the defective
glycocalyx of apoptotic cells, prior to shedding. The staining of
small clusters of surface cells may have a similar explanation, but an
additional possibility is that the dye enters the paracellular space
around a cell that is about to be shed, across a defective tight
junction and spreads into neighbouring cells across their plasma
membranes, ie. by transmembrane spread [79a]. Intercellular
spread of dye between neighbouring cells via gap-junctions is less
likely in the superficial epithelium since these are absent from layer
1 in the human cornea and connectivity is limited in the second
layer [404]. An alternative view has been expressed [363].
5.5.1.2. The pattern of staining in dry eye. Epithelial staining of the
exposed cornea and conjunctiva in DED has a characteristic hori￾zontal, inter-palpebral distribution, which is of diagnostic value
(Fig. 6). There has been a longstanding interest in its basis, partic￾ularly in relation to hyperosmolar hot-spots generated in the
interblink interval. McMonnies [405], and others [406] have
emphasized the role of partial blinking in extending the period of
lower globe exposure to desiccating stress, emphasizing that the
period of exposure will be a multiple of the number of partial blinks
that occur in sequence. Partial blinking is common, both in normal
subjects and in DED. A figure of up 22% was reported in one study of
normal eyes [407] and may comprise from 20% to over 50% of all
blinks [408e410]. Jansen et al. noted that in subjects engaged in
tasks requiring a high degree of visual concentration, both the
number of incomplete blinks and the interblink interval increased
[290].
The region of meniscus-induced thinning (MIT), corresponding
to the position of the ‘black line’ in the fluorescein-stained tear film,
is also predicted to be a site of tear hyperosmolarity in the
interblink interval [163,411]. However, the risk of hyperosmolar
damage to the underlying corneal and conjunctival epithelium, due
to MIT, is minimized by eye movements, especially in the vertical
plane, which can distribute the effect over a wider area and reduce
its damaging potential. Nonetheless, as McMonnies has observed,
‘this may not be the case during reading, watching television, or
similar activity, when up and down eye movements are limited and
the zone of MIT maintains a more stable location on the ocular
surface. Stability of its location is likely to be associated with an
increased risk of hyperosmolarity-related epitheliopathy’ [405].
This effect will be amplified in conditions where there is a severe
restriction of eye movements, such as in progressive supranuclear
palsy [412], progressive external ophthalmoplegia [413] and
endocrine exophthalmos [414].
Additionally, it has been reported in normal subjects that, after
short periods of up or downgaze, bands of MIT are imprinted onto
the cornea which persist in the interblink interval. These may be
accompanied by a secondary disruption of the tear film below
[197]. These zones of thinning represent regions of potential
hyperosmolar damage and hence a source of increased staining.
The above considerations summarize factors which might direct
desiccating stress to the lower part of the exposed globe in any eye.
These influences will be amplified in environmental conditions that
increase desiccating stress and will be further so in DED states
where early tear film breakup will determine the location of
regional hotspots of hyperosmolarity. They appear to offer a
reasonable explanation for the pattern and distribution of punctate
epitheliopathy in DED.
5.5.1.3. Filamentary keratitis. Filamentary keratitis describes a
condition of solitary or grouped filaments, usually no greater than
2 mm in length, which extend from the corneal epithelium into the
tear film (Fig. 6). They seldom occur on the conjunctiva. It is asso￾ciated with ocular surface disorders such as DED, SLK, viral
Table 7
Ocular targets of dry eye disease.
i. The Lacrimal Gland.
Inflammatory cell infiltration of ducts and acini
ii. The Meibomian Glands
Terminal duct obstruction; duct dilatation and gland loss
iii. The Cornea
Punctate epithelial keratopathy.
Filamentary keratitis
Superior Limbic Keratoconjunctivitis (SLK)
iv. The Conjunctiva.
a. General changes
Punctate epitheliopathy
Glycocalyx changes
Goblet cell loss
b. Bulbar changes
Lid parallel conjunctival folds (LIPCOF)
SLK
c. Tarsal changes
The lid margins changes
Marx's line migration
Lid wiper epitheliopathy.
v. Both Cornea and Conjunctiva.
Increased epithelial shedding
vi. Tear Film Instability
Early signs
Tear film breakup. Spot, dimple, line, area
Fig. 6. Severe filamentary keratitis, with extensive corneal staining with fluorescein.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 456
conjunctivitis, recurrent corneal erosion, neuroparalytic keratitis,
post corneal transplantation, cataract surgery, ocular trauma and
ptosis. In ptosis and SLK, filaments are commonly located under the
upper lid; otherwise, for instance with severe aqueous deficiency,
they have an interpalpebral location.
Corneal filaments stain particularly well with rose bengal and
lissamine green. Using immunohistochemistry, Tanioka et al.
showed that they have a twisted epithelial core, surrounded by
secretory (MUC5AC) and membrane-associated (MUC16) mucins,
inflammatory cells, and conjunctival epithelial cells, from which
they concluded that filaments are spun out by an increased fric￾tional action during blinking [415]. Frictional drag on the filaments
during blinking results in severe, intractable, ocular pain and
foreign body sensation [416]. Although filaments can be removed
manually after instillation of a topical anesthetic, recurrence is not
uncommon.
5.5.1.4. Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis. SLK [417] is a bilateral,
chronic inflammatory disease, affecting the upper bulbar con￾junctiva, superior limbus and adjacent cornea. It can be a source of
disabling discomfort. Typically, a patch of severe, perilimbal
conjunctival hyperemia or inflammation, is accompanied by limbal
thickening, punctate keratopathy, filamentary keratitis and a
papillary reaction in the overlying superior tarsal conjunctiva.
There may be a discrepancy between the level of pain experienced
and the severity of clinical signs and the diagnosis may be missed if
lissamine green staining is not carried out in the clinical workup of
unexplained ocular discomfort. Staining with fluorescein is less
apparent unless used with a suitable filter combination [74].
Histologically, squamous metaplasia, epithelial thickening with
a decrease in the nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, and a disappearance of
goblet cells is reported in SLK [417]. Twenty five percent of SLK
cases are associated with DED [418] and about 30% with thyroid
disease [419], therefore it is important to examine hormone and
autoantibody status. There is also an association with con￾junctivochalasis affecting the upper bulbar conjunctiva [420,421].
In SLK, it is reported that the chronic inflammation may be
related to the blink and to eye motion [418] and the association of
SLK with upper bulbar conjunctivochalasis strongly supports
recurrent frictional trauma as a trigger, particularly since surgery
directed towards tightening the conjunctiva at this location is
highly successful [421,422]. Similarly, in endocrine exophthalmos,
an increase in the pressure of the upper lid against the globe may be
invoked as the mechanism that precipitates SLK in thyroid disease
with exophthalmos.
5.5.2. Conjunctiva
Although conjunctival goblet cell loss and a decrease in MUC5AC
concentration in the tears are generally accepted as features of all
forms of DED, reports of changes in the transmembrane mucins are
less consistent [423]. This is in part due to differences in method￾ology, for instance in using immunohistochemistry to detect core
mucin proteins on the one hand or the pattern of mucin glycosyl￾ation on the other. It is difficult to determine what level of glycan
alteration is sufficient to disrupt the glycocalyx permeability barrier
[154]. A loss of a mucin-like glycoprotein (probably MUC 16) from
keratinized, surface conjunctival epithelial cells has been reported
in SLK [424].
5.5.2.1. Modification of the epithelial glycocalyx mucins. There is
evidence of an altered expression or glycosylation of trans￾membrane mucins in DED. In an immunohistochemical study,
conjunctival mucosal epithelial membrane mucin expression was
decreased in Sjogren syndrome € [401]. More recently, Shimazaki-De
et al. reported a reduced MUC16 mRNA expression in the
conjunctiva in DED [425]. Similarly, surface immunoreactivity to
MUC-1 appears to be reduced in Sjogren syndrome epithelium, €
suggesting disruption of normal epithelial differentiation [426],
and Corrales et al. found significantly decreased mRNA expression
of MUC1, MUC2, MUC4 and MUC5AC in ADDE patients [427].
In contrast, it was shown that the density of cells positive to KL6,
a monoclonal antibody against a sialylated epitope of MUC1 was
significantly increased in DED patients compared to normal [428].
Additionally, in Sjogren syndrome DED, mRNA, and proteins of both €
MUC16 and MUC1, were increased compared to normal subjects
[429a, 429b]. The basis for these conflicting findings needs to be
resolved.
Gipson et al. [430] demonstrated an increase MUC1 and MUC16
mRNA and cell protein expression in impression cytology samples
from postmenopausal women compared to normal. In contrast,
Srinivasan et al. [431], found that MUC16 mRNA expression was
significantly reduced in postmenopausal women with moderate to
severe OSDI symptoms, while MUC1 mRNA expression remained
unchanged, compared to non-symptomatic subjects.
In DED, some alterations of mucin glycosylation have been
investigated. Garcher et al. showed a decrease of sialylated chains
of mucins expressed in impression cytology samples from DED
patients and CL users and in glaucoma patients treated with
b-blockers [432]. In general, glycosyltransferases are the enzymes
responsible for the initiation and elongation of glycan chains
attached to the protein backbone. In mucins, the enzymatic addi￾tion of N-acetyl galactosamine (GalNAc) to serine and threonine
residues by GalNAc-transferases (GalNAc-T) is the initial step in O￾glycosylation. In ocular cicatricial pemphigoid (OCP), the conjunc￾tival expression of GalNAc-transferases was increased in patients
with early disease, which could play a role in maintaining epithelial
wettability. Conversely, as might be predicted, expression was
markedly reduced at the stage of conjunctival keratinization [433].
5.5.2.2. Goblet cell loss. Ralph [434] emphasized that conjunctival
goblet cell loss is a feature of all forms of DED, and this has been
confirmed in later reports, in Sjogren syndrome (SS), OCP, alkali €
burn, radiation keratitis, SLK, trachoma and after LASIK treatment
[401,428,435e439]. In keeping with this, a decrease in MUC5AC
staining has been shown by immuno-fluorescence in conjunctival
impression samples from DED patients [440] and the expression of
conjunctival, MUC5AC mRNA was also significantly decreased in
SSDE [383,441], NSDE [427], and in patients with tear film insta￾bility [425]. MUC5AC mucin protein levels have also been reported
to be decreased in human tear samples from patients with un￾specified DED [384] and in patients with severe SSDE [383], and
also in the mild DED of visual display terminal (VDT) users [442].
Versura et al., using an immunogold technique, demonstrated a
decreased expression of sialic acid, N-acetyl-glucosamine and N￾acetyl-galactosamine in the goblet cells of DED patients [443].
5.5.2.3. Lid Parallel Conjunctival Folds (LIPCOF). Lid parallel
conjunctival folds (LIPCOF) are due to a redundancy of the bulbar
conjunctiva and loss of adherence to the episclera that draws the
conjunctiva into a series of folds, above the lower lid margin. It is
likely that they result from the same general mechanism that leads
to age-related bulbar conjunctival folds elsewhere on the ocular
surface (conjunctivochalasis), which have a frictional relationship
to blinking [343a]. LIPCOF can be identified using slit-lamp bio￾microscopy and white light, with the patient in primary gaze and
measured at the lower lid margin at points directly below each
nasal and temporal limbus [343a]. Most recently, optical coherence
tomography has also been used to quantify the degree of LIPCOF
[444]. Using routine slit-lamp biomicroscopy, the number of
conjunctival folds present above the inferior lid, are assessed
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 457
relative to the height of the tear meniscus [445]. Of note, LIPCOF
disappear when the lower eyelid is retracted and then reappear
after a few blinks when lid position is restored. LIPCOF are thought
to result from inflammatory elastic fibre degradation, possibly
involving MMPs [446], or from mechanical friction influencing
lymphatic flow [447]. Their presence has good positive predictive
value for DED [446,448,449].
5.5.3. The lids
5.5.3.1. Marx's line and the mucocutaneous junction. Marx's line is a
vital dye staining pattern of the epithelium, located directly behind
the mucocutaneous junction (MCJ) of the lid margin
[36,76,104,341,450]. (Figs. 7 and 8) It can be demonstrated
throughout life on the upper and lower lid margins, extending from
the outer canthi to the punctal regions. In youth it is only a few cells
wide, but it broadens with age [341] and, together with the MCJ
takes an increasingly irregular course.
At the mucocutaneous junction, the epithelium changes from a
hydrophilic, waterewettable, parakeratinized conjunctival epithe￾lium [40] to the keratinized, hydrophobic epithelium of the lid
margin skin. The tear meniscus overlies this hydrophilic epithelium
and is pinned to the MCJ at this apex, marking its location. Knop
prefers to regard the whole of this parakeratinised zone as the MCJ,
stretching from the point at which skin keratinization ends, to the
posterior border of the lid margin, or ‘crest’ (Fig. 9) [40].
It has been postulated that during the interblink interval dif￾ferential effects of evaporation lead to a gradient of tear molarity
with a hyperosmolar peak at the tip of the apex. This is suggested to
encourage increased epithelial turnover immediately behind the
MCJ, incomplete differentiation of the surface epithelial cells and an
immature glycocalyx, which accounts for the uptake of stain
referred to as Marx's line [163,451]. An argument against this solute
gradient hypothesis is that hyperosmolarity should be cleared
when the tears are refreshed at each blink. However, a number of
recent reports suggest that there is not full apposition of the lid
margins with every blink [343b,452] and application of Navier￾Stokes equations to tear dynamics at the meniscus, instead of
lubrication theory, predicts a distinct absence of fluid flow and
hence of convective mixing, at the meniscus apex, adjacent to the
contact line [411]. This would tend to preserve evaporation￾dependent hyperosmolarity at this site. Increased permeability at
the site of Marx's line could permit the diffusion of proteins of at
least 20Kd and provide a route for pro-inflammatory cytokines
such as IL-1b, IFN-g, TNF-a and MMPs to reach the terminal mei￾bomian ducts.
Since IL-1b and IFNg are able to induce the expression of cor￾nified envelope precursor proteins in epithelial cells [453], their
delivery over many years, could contribute to hyperkeratinization
at this site, a key feature of MGD. This is supported by the findings
of Yamaguchi et al. who reported an age-related, forward
Fig. 7. Schematic view of the lower tear meniscus and lid margin. The meniscus overlies and wets both the occlusal part of the marginal mucosa and the adjoining surface, in
contact with the globe. The peripheral apex of the meniscus is pinned at the mucocutaneous junction (MCJ) which forms the boundary between the stratified squamous keratinized
epidermis of the lid margin skin and the stratified squamous, parakeratinized occlusal conjunctiva. It is located directly behind the meibomian gland orifices. The row of stainable
epithelial cells that make up Marx's line lie under the apex of the tear meniscus, immediately behind the MCJ. (from Bron, A. J., et al. (2011). “A solute gradient in the tear meniscus. I.
A hypothesis to explain Marx's line.“ Ocul Surf 9(2): 70e91 - with permission) [163].
Fig. 8. Marx's line of the upper lid of a young adult, stained with lissamine green.
(courtesy of N Yokoi).
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 458
movement of the line which was positively correlated with both the
meibography scores and the quality of expressed meibum, implying
an association with MGD [454].
In the presence of MGD, the line of stain may broaden and
advance to involve the region of the meibomian orifices [454], or in
the upper lid, with DED and contact lens wear, may broaden pos￾teriorly to merge with LWE [344b]. The lower lid may be similarly
affected [346].
Of those agents known to be increased in concentration in dry
eye tears, TNFa and neutrophil elastase, can cause shedding of
glycocalyx mucins such as MUC 16 [241], and could increase the
population of cells accessible to dyes, thereby broadening Marx's
line. MMP9 causes proteolysis of tight junctional proteins such as
zona occludens-1 and occludin [309,314,315] and could increase
access to the paracellular compartment of the epithelium and the
terminal meibomian ducts.
5.5.3.2. Lid-wiper epitheliopathy. LWE, the name given to the re￾gion of staining on the lid wiper epithelium, and considered to
result from friction-related damage [324,342,344a,b], has been
demonstrated to affect both the upper and lower lid [346].
Although, for the upper lid it has usually been attributed to blink￾ing, gaze movements also generate a relative movement between
the lids and the globe and may be hypothesized to contribute
frictional wear and tear to the LW region. Additionally, the initiation
of a horizontal saccade is frequently accompanied by a blink, so that
they are often combined in everyday viewing conditions [455a].
The epitheliopathy can be demonstrated with rose bengal,
lissamine green or fluorescein when it is seen as a narrow, irregular
patch of staining of the lid-wiper region affecting either the upper
and/or lower lid margin particularly in its central part. It is relevant
that, during the blink, although the angular velocity of the upper lid
margin is the same along the length of the lid, its linear velocity is
highest at its centre, which traverses the full width of the lid
aperture, while traversing least distance at its medial and temporal.
Therefore the opportunity for frictional damage to the lid or globe is
always greatest in the mid-zone of the palpebral aperture, relating
more to the cornea than the bulbar conjunctiva. Because the lid￾wiper zone makes a narrow band of contact as it traverses the
palpebral aperture, the impact of shear stress will be concentrated
more on the LW epithelium than the corneal epithelium or globe
[324].
Fig. 9. According to Wolff (1946) [76] the marginal conjunctiva is a transitional zone between the skin and the conjunctiva proper, extending posteriorly for about 2 mm, from the
mucocutaneous junction (MCJ) anteriorly, past the posterior lid margin and onto the tarsal plate, ending at the subtarsal fold. This H and E section passes through the posterior
border of the upper lid margin in the mid-temporal region (AeE). In this figure, the MCJ is described by Knop et al. [36], as a zone, here, 274 mm wide, extending from the sharp edge
of the cornified epidermis, to the ‘crest’ of the of mucosal epithelium, corresponding to the posterior lid margin. The Pathophysiology Subcommittee prefers to describe the MCJ as a
line of junction between the epidermis and mucosal epithelium, marked clinically by the apex of the tear meniscus (See text and Fig. 7), in which case this stretch of transitional,
mucosal epithelium is referred to as the occlusal zone of the marginal mucosa (Bron et al., 2011) [163]. In this section, Knop et al. [36] describe a continuous anterior zone (150 mm
wide e B, grey line) of parakeratinised (pk) cells, followed by a zone of discontinuous pk cells interspersed with ordinary squamous (s) cells. On the tarsal plate, posterior to the crest
(narrow dashed line in A, B), is the lid wiper region, which forms a thickened, cushion-like structure, is composed mainly of cuboidal cells, some columnar cells, and also goblet cells
(asterisks in B), some of which reside in crypts. Here it reaches a maximal thickness of 98 mm and extends for a distance of about 1000 mm (A) to reach the sub-tarsal fold. Additional
features include: a few intraepithelial lymphocytes (arrowheads in B), occasional small clefts (cl in B), vessels, including high endothelial venules (h), ordinary venules (v), and
arterioles (a) underneath the MCJ, better seen in higher magnification (D, Scale bar: 100 lm (A,B); 10 lm (CeE). (gr in B ¼ Granular layer). (from Knop, E., et al. (2011). “The lid wiper
and muco-cutaneous junction anatomy of the human eyelid margins: an in vivo confocal and histological study.” J Anat 218(4): 449e461. e with permission) [40].
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 459
Korb et al. [324] compared the frequency of upper LWE in
asymptomatic subjects without dry eyes, with that in a group of
symptomatic DED patients, using sequential staining with a fluo￾rescein/lissamine green combination. The epitheliopathy was
graded on a scale of 0e3 using the horizontal lengths and average
sagittal widths of the stained wiper. They found a LWE frequency of
16% in asymptomatic subjects, with 14% of Grade 1, 2%, Grade 2, and
0%, Grade 3. In symptomatic patients, 88% had LWE, with 22% Grade
1, 46% Grade 2, and 20% Grade 3. The overall prevalence of LWE was
six times more in the DED group and the prevalence of LWE Grade 2
or greater was 16 times greater in DED patients than in controls
(P < 0.0001).
In a study by Shiraishi et al. [346] the prevalence of lower-LWE
was found to be significantly higher (39.5%) than upper-LWE in
non-CL wearers (12.0%: P < 0.001) and the prevalence of both up￾per- and lower-LWE were significantly correlated with age
(P < 0.001) but not sex or breakup time.
At first sight this is a surprising finding, since, while both lids are
exposed to the frictional action of the globe during horizontal
saccades, only the upper LW is exposed to extended friction during
the blink, since the excursion of the lower lid during blinking is
small. This puzzle was addressed in a further study, in which lid
movement and globe displacement were followed during sponta￾neous blinking and lid pressure against the globe measured with a
blepharo-tensiometer. The authors found no relationship between
eyelid pressure and any grade of upper-LWE, but eyelid pressure in
eyes with grade 3 lower-LWE (27.9 ± 2.8 mmHg) was significantly
higher than with grade 0 lower-LWE (19.7 ± 1.3 mm Hg; p < 0.05).
Also, lower eyelid pressure was significantly correlated with the
length of horizontal movement of the lower eyelids during blinking
(p < 0.05) and the degree of posterior movement of the eye globe
(p < 0.05). The authors concluded that one cause for the develop￾ment of lower-LWE was the application of a higher pressure from
the lower eyelid [455b].
It is possible, too, that another factor operates. The upper lid and
globe move together in vertical gaze, but not synchronously e there
is a small relative movement between them. In contrast, the lower
lid moves only a small amount in vertical gaze, so that there is a
rapid movement of the globe in relation to the lower lid wiper, a
potential source of significant friction during reading and working
at a computer.
6. Inflammatory responses in dry eye e innate and adaptive
immunity
In general, immune processes are classified as innate or adap￾tive. Innate immune responses are considered to be fast and non￾specific, whereas adaptive responses evolve over time, are spe￾cific and generate memory. These processes occur at the same time
and cross-talk between each system is critical for the development
of an effective response.
The immune responses of the ocular surface are not different
from those at other mucosal surfaces [234,456,457]. The microen￾vironment of the ocular surface is constantly exposed to environ￾mental challenges and maintains surveillance over desiccation,
microorganisms, pollution and allergens and other noxious agents.
Insults may be either acute or chronic and the immune system
deals with them accordingly.
6.1. Innate immune responses in dry eye disease
6.1.1. Barriers and inflammatory signals
A critical component of the innate immune system is to provide
a physical barrier between the eye and the external environment,
for instance preventing the adherence of microorganisms and
passage of toxins across the surface epithelia. Elements that
accomplish this include the gel mucin of the tears, the glycocalyx,
the epithelium itself and a stream of antimicrobial defense proteins
including lactoferrin, lysozyme, lipocalin and trefoil peptides and
surface molecules such as the defensins (a and b) [159,458e461].
However, the corneal and conjunctival epithelia are considered to
be the “gate keepers” of the ocular surface [462].
This defense system can be hijacked by the hyperosmolar stress
of DED, through the activation of MAPK that in turn activate the
master regulator, NFKB, production of IL-1 (chiefly) and of TNF-a.
These have major downstream effects by inducing a cascade of
other mediators and cellular signals that amplify the inflammatory
immune response. IL-1 and TNF-a then up-regulate MMP-9 pro￾duction by corneal epithelial cells, which is associated with
disruption of the epithelial corneal barrier [316].
An aspect of the innate defense system involves activation of
pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) such as the Toll-like receptors
(TLRs) and the NOD-like receptor (NLR) that mediate cytosolic,
inflammasome inflammation. They both participate in the inflam￾matory response of DED [463]. Stimulation of these receptors is
associated with the up-regulation of IL-1, TNF-a and also of IL-6.
6.1.2. Recruitment signals and inflammatory cells
Experimentally, the expression of IL-1, TNF-a and IL-6 by ocular
surface epithelia is critical to the inflammatory response of DED. A
step in the amplification process is the generation of signals that
recruit both innate and adaptive inflammatory cells to the site of
inflammation. These signals may be soluble or membrane-bound
and include chemokines and adhesion molecules [464]. In an
experimental model of DED, induced by desiccating stress (DES)
and scopolamine, the increased expression of inflammatory cyto￾kines by the cornea and conjunctiva was greatly reduced in IL-1
receptor knockout mice [465].
Chemokines produced at the ocular surface during an inflam￾matory response (eg. CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CX3CL1,
[306, 466 469] can bind macrophages, dendritic cells, neutrophils
and activated T cells in which the respective chemokine receptors
are up-regulated [470].
The other critical step in the homing of these inflammatory cells to
the ocular surface is the expression of endothelial adhesion mole￾cules [464] such as the intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1)
which is expressed by conjunctival and corneal epithelium and by
blood vessel endothelium in DED [471]. ICAM-1 is an adhesion
molecule that binds to inflammatory cells expressing the ligand,
integrin leukocyte functional antigen 1 (LFA-1), causing rolling,
transmigration and activation at the site of inflammation and in
lymphoid organs [464,472]. Such molecules, located at the surface of
the eye, represent potentially accessible therapeutic targets. Lifite￾grast, an ICAM inhibitor, has recently been approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of DED [473].
Three distinct cell types are involved in the innate inflammatory
response, neutrophils, NK cells and monocyte/macrophages. The
role of neutrophils in DED is an area of current investigation and the
importance of NETs was alluded to earlier (see Section 4.8). How￾ever, in a DES model of DED, depletion of neutrophils led to
increased CD4þT cell activation and increased corneal staining,
demonstrating that at some stage, neutrophils may play a protec￾tive role [474].
Recent studies of DED models suggest that NK cells may make a
significant contribution in the pathogenesis of DED [105,475e477a].
The recruitment or activation of resident ocular NK cells has been
associated with the increased production of inflammatory cytokines
that include IFN-g, IL-6, IL-17 and IL-23, which stimulate macro￾phages, antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and auto-reactive T cells. NK
cells may be an early source of IFN-g that is responsible for the
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 460
activation and differentiation of Th1 T cells, induction of cos￾timulatory signals by APCs and which, itself, is a key inflammatory
cytokine causing conjunctival epithelial damage and goblet cell loss
[475,478].
The infiltration of the conjunctiva by monocytes, that differen￾tiate into tissue-associated macrophages, is a notable feature of
murine DED. Indeed, infiltration by CD11bþ (monocyte/macro￾phages) and CD14þ macrophages correlates with disease progres￾sion in a mouse model of autoimmune lacrimal keratoconjunctivitis
[479]. Monocytes can differentiate into two types of tissue macro￾phage; M1 cells are associated with pro-inflammatory responses
whereas M2 cells are regulatory. DED has been shown to induce an
M1 phenotype in a desiccating stress model [480].
6.1.3. The features of innate immunity
Other elements that are considered to be part of the innate
immune system are the gamma/delta (g/d) T cells and the com￾plement system. g/d T cells are frequently found in close proximity
to epithelial cells, including the conjunctival epithelium [476]. g/d T
cells can produce IL-17 [481] in the ocular surface but their specific
role during DED remains unknown. Studies investigating the role of
complement, in the ocular surface inflammation of DED, are limited
to observations in animal models where nude mice receiving serum
from mice with dry-eye, develop DED associated with the recruit￾ment of inflammatory cells and cytokines by the activation of C3a/
C5a and C3b/C5b and the formation of the membrane attack
complex (MAC) [482]. These observations were also supported by
the demonstration of C3b expression in the conjunctiva of diseased
mice and the dampening of disease by neutralizing the comple￾ment pathway with the systemic administration of cobra venom
[482].
6.2. Adaptive immune responses of the ocular surface
6.2.1. Initiation of adaptive immunity by antigen presentation
The presence of CD4þ T cells at the ocular surface in DED and the
successful treatment of ocular surface inflammation with topical
cyclosporine suggested a potential role for adaptive immunity in
DED [483]. Initiation of an adaptive immune response requires that
antigens at the site of inflammation are processed and presented by
professional APCs that migrate to regional lymphoid tissue to
activate and expand antigen-specific effector T cells. Although the
antigen or antigens that initiate this response in DED are not
known, the expression of auto-antigens is hypothesized to be a key
trigger to the inflammatory epitheliopathy in Sjogren syndrome. €
This is regarded as the basis for the production of autoantibodies to
type 3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (anti-M3R Ab) and the
Kallikrein family of proteins including Klk1 and Klk13 [482,
484 486] and the generation of autoreactive T cells [487].
Evidence for ocular surface antigen presentation as the initiating
step in the adaptive immune response has come from the corre￾lation between the accumulation of mature CD11c APCs, the acti￾vation of antigen-specific CD4þ T cells in draining lymph nodes
during desiccating stress, and the reduction of CD4þ T cell infil￾tration in animals depleted of ocular surface macrophages and
APCs [479]. As ocular surface tissue from inflammatory conditions
is characterized by the up-regulation of MHC II and other stimu￾latory signals, the activation of circulating, primed T cells that are
recruited to the cornea and conjunctiva of patients with DED is
another plausible pathway of antigen presentation in the genera￾tion of local adaptive immune responses [471,482,488].
6.2.2. Lymphoid tissues and the ocular surface
Although the spleen is considered to be the main lymphoid
tissue responsible for the immune-regulation of intraocular
antigens, its role in the immunity of ocular surface inflammation is
not considered to be dominant [457]. Also, the role of the thymus in
the regulation of the ocular surface immune response is poorly
understood. However, evidence from DED in animal models and
patients with ocular graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) GVHD in
which thymic damage is caused by conditioning before hemato￾poietic stem cell transplantation, suggests that central tolerance,
regulated by the thymic environment, may be important in ocular
surface immunity [489].
6.2.2.1. Conjunctiva-associated lymphoid tissue, or. As in other
mucosae, such as the gut, the conjunctiva is equipped with local,
stromal collections of lymphoid tissue that are involved in the in￾duction of mucosal tolerance and the regulation of inflammation
and immune defense at the ocular surface [490]. These foci
constitute CALT, the local equivalent of the MALT collections in
mucosae throughout the body [118]. They form part of the immune
lymphoid circuit.
CALT foci have access to the epithelial surface, and germinal
centre/follicle formation has been identified in response to local
antigen exposure. Evidence for both homeostatic and pathological
responses to protein, microbes and microbial products has been
demonstrated in animal models and postulated to occur in humans
[491e493].
6.3. Inflammation, the meibomian gland and dry eye
A striking feature of the human meibomian gland is its apparent
resistance to inflammation and infection. For example, there is no
peer-reviewed evidence of inflammation or infection in this tissue
in obstructive MGD [36,494,495,976]. Further, exposure of human
meibomian gland epithelial cells to a bacterial toxin (i.e. lipopoly￾saccharide [LPS]) does not induce the expression of pro￾inflammatory gene ontologies, other than that associated with
Toll-like receptor signaling [496]. In contrast, LPS stimulates a
marked upregulation of genes linked to defense, cytokine and
chemokine production, chemotaxis, Toll-like receptor signaling
pathways and inflammatory and immune responses in immortal￾ized human corneal and conjunctival epithelial cells [496]. It is
possible that this apparent resistance to inflammation and infec￾tion within the human meibomian gland is due to the presence of
innate anti-inflammatory and anti-infective factors.
In support of this hypothesis, the most highly expressed gene in
the human meibomian gland encodes for leukocyte-associated
immunoglobulin-like receptor-1 (LAIR-1) [505]. LAIR-1 is an
inhibitory receptor that suppresses immune cell activation and
reduces pro-inflammatory cytokine production [497,498]. Expres￾sion of the LAIR-1 gene is upregulated during human meibomian
gland epithelial cell differentiation [43], as are those for uteroglobin
(suppresses inflammation [1202]), phospholipase A2 (kills gram￾positive bacteria and is a key bactericide in human tears [499])
and CCL28 (has antimicrobial activity against gram-positive and
gram-negative bacteria [500]). Recently, investigators had also
found that human meibomian gland epithelial cell lysates inhibit
the growth rate of the Gram-negative bacteria, Pseudomonas aer￾uginosa, in vitro [501]. In addition, human MGD is associated with a
significant increase in intraglandular transcripts for [a] S100 cal￾cium binding proteins A8 and A9 (S100A8/9, also called calpro￾tectin; in high concentrations this heterodimer has anti￾inflammatory and anti-microbial functions and makes epithelial
cells more resistant to bacterial invasion [502e504,1217]; [b]
peptidase inhibitor 3, skin-derived (also called elafin [1203], in￾hibits bacterial infection [1202]); and [c] S100A7 (also called
psoriasin, an antimicrobial peptide [1202]) [505].
These findings do not mean that human meibomian glands
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 461
cannot become inflamed or infected. A single meibomian gland, for
instance, may develop a chalazion (i.e. inflammation associated
with a blocked gland), that may become secondarily infected.
Further, LPS can induce leukotriene B4 secretion from human
meibomian gland epithelial cells [60], and isotretinoin can induce
the expression of some inflammatory mediators in these cells [45].
However, neither inflammation nor infection is a characteristic of
obstructive MGD, which affects multiple glands [36,506].
7. Research in animal models and cellular models in vitro
The use of animal models to study DED is a source of hypothesis
generation, which enables pathological mechanisms to be exam￾ined in relation to clinical disease. The influence of risk factors such
as age, sex and environment can also be explored and, in the case of
Sjogren syndrome, the effect of immune dysregulation on immune €
tolerance. A general review animal models of DED is provided by
Schrader et al. [507].
7.1. Animal models of Non-Sjogren dry eye €
7.1.1. Overview
The Subcommittee has focused on the following two models:
The desiccating environmental stress model (DES) involves expo￾sure to a combination of low humidity and increased airflow with
or without muscarinic blockade. The muscarinic receptor blockade
model (SCP) involves systemic injection of scopolamine to suppress
parasympathetic nervous system function and thereby inhibit
lacrimal gland secretion.
There are acute and chronic DES models and there is great in￾terest in recovery from damage after removal of the initiating cause
because of its relevance to self-perpetuating disease.
7.1.2. The desiccating stress model
The desiccating stress or desiccating environmental stress (DES)
model, first described by Dursun et al. [508] and later modified by
several investigators [509,510] combines a high air flow, a low
relative humidity and cholinergic blockade, to impair lacrimal
gland secretion. It has become a standard DED model and has been
used to study pathogenesis of DED, and potential therapies
[511e515] The DES model recapitulates several features of DED,
including corneal staining, conjunctival goblet cell loss, conjunc￾tival infiltration with CD4þ T cells, increased cytokines in tears, and
apoptosis of ocular surface epithelium [378,427,516e518]. Inter￾estingly, DES induces profound epithelial changes, with increased
production of cytokines, chemokines and MMPs that precede the
initation of the immune response [309,378,519], but a significant
modulation of the immune system occurs (described below).
Another feature of DED is activation of MAPK that include
extracellular signal regulated kinases, JNK and p38 MAPK.
Increased levels of active, phosphorylated JNK1 and JNK2 in ocular
surface epithelia treated with hypertonic saline in vivo and in
cultured human corneal epithelial cells exposed to hyperosmolar
media has been reported [309e311]. Furthermore, JNK2 but not
JNK1, appears to mediate desiccation-induced corneal epithelial
disease (by stimulating production of MMP-1, MMP-9, and corni-
fied envelope precursors) since JNK2KO mice were resistant to
DED-induced changes [520].
7.1.2.1. Initiation of dry eye by desiccating stress. Disruption of
afferent and efferent immunoregulation of the ocular surface is
recognised as a major process underlying DED inflammation
[234,521]. Pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, TNF-a and IL-6) and
chemokines, released from stressed ocular surface epithelia cause
epithelial damage and activate antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and
NK cells [234,475]. In addition, activation of an innate, NK cell
response not only damages target tissues but promotes APC
maturation through IFN-g [475,476,522]. These activated APCs on
the ocular surface migrate to draining lymph nodes (DLNs) via
newly-formed lymphatic vessels (facilitated by VEGF-C and VEGF￾D) [512,523,524] and help to prime naïve T cells in the draining
lymph nodes (DLNs), leading to the activation and expansion of
IFN-g-secreting CD4þ T (Th1) and IL-17-secreting CD4þ T (Th17)
cells [476,479,525,526]. These unrestrained effector T cells home to
the ocular surface via blood vessels under the influence of
increased levels of local, ocular surface chemokines [516,527,528].
Increased levels of IL-17 and IFN-g from activated T cells on the
ocular surface lead, in addition, to disruption of the epithelial
corneal barrier and to decreased conjunctival goblet cell density
[516,523,529].
Although both CD4þ and CD8þ T cells take part in the adaptive
immune response to antigens, CD4þ T cells predominate at the
ocular surface in chronic DED [487]. Naïve CD4þ T cells in the
lymphoid tissue differentiate into four functional phenotypes
designated according to their major cytokine products. These are
classified as Th1, Th2, Th17 and T regulatory (Treg) lymphocytes.
Upon antigen presentation, the cytokine milieu present at the time
of T cell activation is a major determinant of the final outcome of
differentiation. The resolution of the adaptive immune response is
mediated by the elimination of these effector CD4þ T cells by
activation-induced apoptosis at the site of inflammation, which
results in the generation of memory, antigen-specific T cells char￾acterized by the differential expression of surface markers
including CD45RBþ, CD44þ and CD69þ.
Th2 CD4þ T cells have been associated with the development of
allergic responses in the ocular surface and also have a role in
maintaining homeostatic levels of conjunctival goblet cells [105].
Niederkorn and colleagues elegantly showed that adoptive transfer
of CD4þT cells into immunodeficient mice, primed in vivo during
DES, recapitulates the DED phenotype observed in donor mice
[487]. Mice developed DED, with lacrimal gland infiltration, corneal
staining, goblet cell loss, CD4þT cell infiltration in the conjunctiva
and production of cytokines and matrix metal￾loproteinases.(Niederkorn, Stern et al., 2006) (Fig. 10) [487].
Th1 CD4þ T cells are the classic pathogenic T cell subset asso￾ciated with the generation and progression of immune-related dry
eye disease [478]. These populations of effector T cells are differ￾entiated by the presence of IL-12 and are characterized by their
production of IL-2 and IFN-g at the site of inflammation. The pro￾duction of IFN-g by Th1 CD4þ T cells is a major determinant of the
pathological changes observed in the ocular surface of dry eye
patients including epithelial cell death, loss of goblet cells and
epithelial cells, and squamous cell metaplasia [516,530e532]. The
recruitment of Th1 CD4þ T cells to the ocular surface is regulated by
their expression of LFA-1 and its interaction with ICAM expressed in
the ocular tissues of patients with DED [472]. Moreover, their
increased expression of CCR5 and CXCR3 makes them responsive to
the chemoattractants CCL5 and CXCL10, which are also produced in
the inflamed ocular surface in response to DES [467,527]. IFN- g has
been shown to antagonize IL-13 in the lung and the gut and this is
also true on the ocular surface. As noted, IL-13 promotes goblet cell
homeostasis in physiological conditions [105], while IFN-g pro￾motes goblet cell apoptosis [478,530]. IFN-g knock-out mice are
resistant to desiccating stress; however, when reconstituted with
IFN-g, they develop goblet cell loss similarly to wild-type mice
[478]. Adoptive transfer of CD4þ T cells from donor mice exposed to
DES that received anti-IFN-g were less pathogenic to immunode-
ficient mice recipients, yielding less corneal apoptosis and greater
number of PASþ filled goblet cells [530]. Mice that received sub￾conjunctival injections of anti-IFN-g antibody showed decreased
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 462
corneal and conjunctival apoptosis [530].
Th17 CD4þ T cells are the prototype of auto-reactive T cells
associated with chronic inflammatory diseases. The presence of IL-
17 in the tear fluid of patients with DED and their localization to the
ocular surface in animal models of DED induced by DES or auto￾immune mechanisms, support the role of these cells in the pro￾gression of disease [458,516,526]. It has also been demonstrated
in vitro that differentiation of naïve CD4þ T cells into Th17 cells is
possible, by co-culturing T cells with corneal epithelial cells that
most likely are a source of IL-17 during ocular surface inflammation.
Just as the recruitment of Th1 CD4þ T cells is enhanced at the ocular
surface in DED, CCL20 is expressed in the ocular surface of animals
exposed to desiccating stress and Th17 T cells expressing CCR6 are
potentially responsive to this signal and can be recruited to the
ocular surface [516,527]. IL17 causes damage to the corneal
epithelium directly and through the up-regulation of MMP9 and
MMP3 and the inhibition of protection by Treg cells [516,529]. Both
IL-17 and IFN- g have been found to be elevated in tears and in
conjunctival impression cytology of DED patients [235,441,458].
Tregs cells are characterized by the expression of
CD4þCD25þhiFoxp3þ markers and their role in the maintenance of
peripheral tolerance has been found to be critical in immune re￾sponses to allo- and auto-antigens in non-ocular diseases. Studies
of mice undergoing desiccating stress suggests a significant role of
Tregs in regulating and dampening the inflammatory response. If
adoptive transfer of Tregs is performed, a significant amelioration
of DED inflammation is observed and this correlates with the
regulation of “ocular specific CD4þT cells” [533]. CD8þ T cells can
also function as regulatory cells, as depletion of CD8þ T cells during
the initiation phases of DES generated more pathogenic T cells. A
functional (but not numeric) defect in Tregs has also been shown in
DES experiments [529].
The role of B cells in the adaptive responses of the ocular surface
in DED remains unclear. B cells and autoantibody production
appear to be implicated in the systemic and ocular manifestations
of Sjogren syndrome in patients and in animal models € [482]. In
contrast, their role in chronic DED in non-autoimmune patients is
not obvious. However, in addition to the production of pathogenic
autoantibodies, the role of professional APCs and activation of auto￾reactive T cells cannot be underestimated [534].
7.1.2.1.1. Distinction between models based on desiccating stress
alone and those induced by scopolamine or by a combination of the
two. A majority of experimental evidence supporting the DED
inflammation described above has been derived from a murine
model of DED that combines DES with systemic muscarinic
acetylcholine receptor inhibition using scopolamine [509,535]. DED
increases tear evaporation through low humidity and high airflow,
and SCP induces tear deficiency by antagonizing muscarinic activity
in the lacrimal glands. Low humidity alone is capable of inducing
DED, but the kinetics are delayed compared to DES [536]. A recent
advance in our understanding of murine DED inflammation is that
DES without muscarinic blockade and SCP induce DED through
different primary mechanisms [537]. DES without muscarinic
blockade induced greater conjunctival CD3 (þ) T-cell infiltration,
and higher Th17-cell activity and Treg dysfunction than SCP, while
SCP reduced tear volume to a greater extent than DES. SCP
Fig. 10. Schematic depiction of adoptive transfer experiments. Mice that were subjected to desiccating stress (DES) had goblet cells loss, corneal staining and CD4þT cell infiltration
in the conjunctiva. CD4þT cells were isolated from spleen and draining cervical lymph nodes using magnetic beads and adoptively transferred into immunodeficient mice that were
never exposed to DES. Adoptively transferred recipients of CD4þ T cells developed DED, with lacrimal gland (LG) infiltration, corneal staining, goblet cell loss, CD4þT cell infiltration
in the conjunctiva and production of cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases, recapitulating the DED phenotype observed in donor mice.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 463
decreased Th17 activity and increased Th2 and Treg responses
without influencing Th1 activity.
It should be noted that by inhibiting cholinergic activity,
scopolamine also has a marked impact on the nature of inflam￾matory and ocular surface responses in DED. Scopolamine would
interfere with the ability of the parasympathetic nervous system to
respond to cytokines released during activation of the innate im￾mune system, and to provide a negative feedback control of innate
immune responses to restore homeostasis [1220]. Scopolamine
would also prevent the ability of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory
pathway to counteract abnormal chronic and hyper-activated in-
flammatory responses [538]. As additional considerations, cholin￾ergic neurotransmitters are known to regulate meibomian gland
epithelial cells [42] and goblet cells [539], but this modulatory ac￾tivity would be suppressed by using scopolamine. Further, goblet
cells appear to be dependent on constant neural input from the
ocular surface [540], but this communication may be hampered by
scopolamine. Overall, given that the immune system and ocular
surface are physiologically important in the development and re￾covery from DED, scopolamine's removal of a major regulatory
system (i.e. cholinergic pathway) limits the physiological relevance
of this SCP model for understanding immunological and ocular
surface processes in human DED.
7.1.2.2. Acute versus chronic evaporative dry eye models. The exist￾ing DED models are created in the acute setting [509,535], which
raises questions as to how findings in these models relate to those
in the clinical setting, where DED is generally encountered as a
chronic disorder. A chronic, murine DED model has recently been
developed, which seeks to address this question [541]. In brief,
acute DED was first induced using the same DES method for 14
days, and affected mice were then transferred to a normal humidity
environment and maintained for an additional 4 months without
any DES or SCP challenge. DED severity peaked at the end of the
DES, and after removal from the DES, the corneal epitheliopathy
gradually regressed to lower levels, but never normalized. Further,
the chronic phase was accompanied by Th17 responses at the
ocular surface. These findings suggest that, following the induction
of acute DED, corneal epitheliopathy and inflammation may persist
into a long-term chronic phase, even without continued exposure
to DES.
The mice selected for use in this chronic study had almost no
corneal fluorescein staining at experimental inception [542]. In
contrast, untreated mice typically seem to have higher and more
variable staining [1213,1214], as do humans (see Section 4.14.1). It
will be of interest to learn whether this chronic model is repro￾duced in mice with higher initial degrees of corneal fluorescein
staining.
7.1.2.3. An age-related dry eye model. Another chronic model of
DED is the aged C57BL/6 mouse, which also develops spontaneous
DED and MGD [545]. Interestingly, female and male mice showed
comparable goblet cell loss but greater corneal staining was
observed in female mice. Adoptive transfer of aged CD4þ T cells
transferred the DED phenotype to RAG1KO mice, indicating that
aging leads to generation of spontaneous autoreactive T cells [545].
The findings of spontaneously activated cells in aged mice of both
Th1 and Th17 phenotype warrants further investigation.
7.1.2.4. Relevance of mouse models for human inflammatory diseases.
Mouse models can be invaluable to help clarify the underlying
physiological and pathological processes in many human condi￾tions. Ideally, such understanding may be translated into therapies
for various human diseases. However, potential treatments that
have been discovered and validated in mouse models do not always
translate successfully to human therapies. This is especially true for
treatments targeting inflammatory pathways. Genomic responses
to inflammatory challenges have demonstrated poor correlations
between different mouse models in comparison with human re￾sponses [546]. Although some studies indicate that experimental
findings with mice can be predictive of therapeutic success in
humans [547,548], the fact remains that almost 150 clinical trials
involving investigational anti-inflammatory therapies based on
mouse data have failed [546], including several potential treat￾ments for DED [549]. Some of these clinical trials were based on
data from DES [514,550,1218] and botulinum toxin [551] mouse
models. These results underscore the need to show whether a given
mouse model mimics, or fails to mimic, a relevant human disease
[546,552,1204].
7.2. Animal models of Sjogren Syndrome dry eye €
7.2.1. Introduction
Sjogren syndrome is a chronic autoimmune disorder that affects €
exocrine glands, notably the lacrimal and salivary glands, causing
DED and dry mouth in addition to affecting other organ systems.
The clinical features of human disease are elaborated in a later
section of this report.
Several animal models have been used to study the pathogen￾esis of Sjogren syndrome and have provided insights into the dis- €
order, including its heterogeneity (Table 8). While animal models
recapitulate one or more aspects of Sjogren syndrome, no perfect €
model exists. This section focuses on ocular events in autoimmune
murine models.
7.2.2. Animal models of Sjogren Syndrome €
A review of the animal model literature shows a dichotomy in
reports, with rheumatological research focused on the salivary
gland as the target organ and ophthalmological research favoring
the lacrimal gland. With the exception of reports in MRL/lpr, NZB/
NZW and NOD mice [553e556], there is relatively little compara￾tive information about salivary and lacrimal pathology in the same
animals. Ocular manifestations are also less widely studied in the
rodent model. There is a need for more studies, embracing patho￾logical changes in both organs which could identify common
pathways of glandular destruction and delineate gland-specific
differences. The temporal sequence of pathological events may be
a guide to cellular and molecular mechanisms. It is still unclear as to
what extent ocular surface manifestations in Sjogren syndrome are €
secondary to lacrimal or meibomian gland involvement or to the
targeting of corneal and conjunctival autoantigens.
The influence of age, disease duration and sex is important in
human Sjogren syndrome and age is one of the strongest risk fac- €
tors for the DED [557e561]. Similarly, in animal models, the full
Sjogren syndrome-phenotype often takes time to evolve €
[536,562,563] Two models illustrate this well. First, as noted, non￾immune C57BL/6 mice spontaneously develop a lacrimal￾dependent DED, starting at post-menopausal age (6e9 months),
up to an elderly age of 24 months [545]. Second, the non-obese
diabetic (NOD) mouse, variant strain (NOD.B10.H2b
) has a mild
Sjogren syndrome phenotype at 10 weeks of age, but develops €
severe dacryoadenitis and DED at one year of age [564]. This sug￾gests that a defined level of immune dysregulation is required to
establish the histological Sjogren syndrome phenotype, dependent €
on such factors as the tissue accumulation of lymphocytes, loss of T
regulatory cells and/or the generation of autoantibodies. Similar to
human Sjogren syndrome, the presence of histologic lesions is €
considered one of the most important criteria for diagnosing
Sjogren syndrome in the animal model € [565].
The strong predeliction of Sjogren syndrome for women has €
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 464
Table 8
Murine models of Sjogren syndrome. €
Age of onset Model Sex predilection Main mechanism Main organs affected References
0e3 Weeks TGF-b KO \ ¼ _ Gene deletion of TGF- b Fatal systemic autoimmunity,
inclusive of LG
(Shull et al., 1992, McCartney￾Francis et al., 1997) [596,1112]
Scurfy \ ¼ _ Deletion in the forkhead
domain of Foxp3
Fatal systemic autoimmunity,
inclusive of LG
(Brunkow et al., 2001, Sharma
et al., 2006) [1113,1114]
4 Weeks CD25KO \ ¼ _ Lack of T regs; autoreactive T
cells
LG; SMG; colon; ocular surface (Sharma et al., 2006, de Paiva
et al., 2010, Pelegrino et al.,
2012, Rahimy et al., 2010)
[536,581,1114,1115]
MRL.lpr \ Autoreactive T cells; disruptive
Fas-Fas ligand system
LG; SMG; ocular surface (Jabs and Prendergast, 1991a,
Jabs and Prendergast, 1991b,
Toda et al., 1999)
[556,574,1116]
\ Defect in the negative selection
of organ-specific T cells
LG; ocular surface Yeh et al., 2009, Li et al., 2008,
Chen et al., 2010)
[589,590,1117]
8 Weeks IL-12 Tg \ ¼ _ Transgenic mice with Increased
expression of IL-12 in thyroid
gland
SMG (Vosters et al., 2009) [1118]
NFKbiz KO \ ¼ _ Epithelial apoptosis prior to
lymphocytic infiltration
LG (Okuma et al., 2013) [602]
12 Weeks C57BL/6.NOD￾Aec1Aec2
\? Transfer of 2 auto-reactive loci
from NOD to non-autoimmune
C57BL/6; milder SS phenotype
than parenteral NOD
LG; SMG; ocular surface (Cha et al., 2002, Robinson et al.,
1998, You et al., 2015, Bulosan
et al., 2008, Cha et al., 2004)
[593,1119e1122]
TSP1 KO ? Lack of autologous activation of
TGF-b; autoreactive T cells
LG; ocular surface (Turpie et al., 2009, Contreras￾Ruiz et al., 2013, Gandhi et al.,
2013) [563,599,1123]
NOD \ (S); _ (D) Inbred strain that develops
autoreactive T cells; a defect in
T regs is controversial
SMG; LG; pancreas (Tsubota et al., 2001, Lieberman
et al., 2015, da Costa et al., 2006,
D'Alise et al., 2008, Skarstein
et al., 1995) [1124-1128]
NHE8 KO \ ¼ _ NHE are a group of membrane
proteins that exchange
extracellular Na þ for
intracellular
Hþ
LG; ocular surface (Xu et al., 2015) [1129]
14 Weeks DN TGFbRII \ ¼ _ Autoreactive T cells due to
disruptive TGF-b signaling
under T cell promoter
LG; ocular surface (de Paiva et al., 2011) [1130]
16 Weeks NOD.B10.H2b _ Replacement of the NOD MHC I￾Ag7Idd1 diabetes susceptibility
locus by the MHC I-Ab locus;
milder SS phenotype than
parenteral NOD in young mice.
LG; SMG; ocular surface Yoon et al., 2008, Yamachika
et al., 1998, Robinson et al.,
1998, Coursey et al., 2015)
[564,618,1120,1131]
OPN-Tg \? Increased expression of
osteopontin
SMG (Husain-Krautter et al., 2015)
[1132]
3 months Tet-mev1
conditional knock￾out
_ Increased mitochondrial
oxidative stress
LG; ocular surface (Uchino et al., 2012) [770]
4 Months Neurturin KO \ ¼ _ Defective parasympathetic
innervation of their lacrimal
glands
LG; ocular surface (Song et al., 2003) [1133]
Act1.CD40 DKO ? Deletion of negative regulator
of B cell survival
SMG > LG; skin around eyes (Qian et al., 2008) [612]
5 months ArKO Neither Estrogen deficiency due to
knock-out of aromatase
(converts androgens to
estrogens)
No inflammation in LG or
meibomian gland; increased
tear volume in male, not
female, compared to wildtype
controls
(Rahimi Darabad et al., 2014,
Darabad et al., 2013) [691,692]
6 Months NZB/NZW F1 \ Hybrid inbred strain,
autoreactive T cells
LG; ocular surface (Kotzin and Palmer, 1988,
Gilbard et al., 1987)
[1134,1135]
ArKO \ Estrogen deficiency due to
knock-out of aromatase
SMG (Iwasa et al., 2015, Ishimaru
et al., 2003)
[714,1136]
9 months C57BL/6 \ ¼ _ Unknown; has accumulation of
autoreactive T cells
LG; ocular surface (McClellan et al., 2014) [1137]
11.5 months SOD1 KO _ Knock-out of anti-oxidant
defences
(superoxide Dismutase)
LG; ocular surface, MGD (Kojima et al., 2012)
(Ibrahim et al., 2014)
[1138,1139]
14 months BAFF tg \ ¼ _ Accumulation of B cells SMG Groom et al., 2002) [611]
12e17 months ArKO \ ¼ _ Estrogen deficiency due to
knock-out of aromatase
SMG (Shim et al., 2004) [1140]
Abbreviations: \ - Female, _ - Male, S e sialodenitis, D - dacryoadenitis G- Lacrimal Glands and SMG- Submandibular Glands.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 465
been linked in large part to the sex-related differences in, and sex
steroid actions on, the immune system. It is discussed in depth in
the TFOS DEWS II Sex, Gender & Hormones report [1222]. Non￾Sjogren DED (NSDE) is also more prevalent in women than in men €
[559,566,567]. Some intriguing observations have been made in
animal models. In the NOD mouse, a model of Sjogren syndrome, €
the susceptibility of the lacrimal gland and salivary gland to in-
flammatory infiltration shows a strong sex bias with sialoadenitis
developing in female mice and dacryoadenitis in male mice [568].
In contrast, as in humans, inflammation is significantly greater in
lacrimal and salivary glands of female MRL/lpr mice, as compared
to age-matched males [569]. Unfortunately, only limited informa￾tion is available concerning the sex-related differences in lacrimal
and salivary glands in animal models of Sjogren syndrome €
[555,556,569,570].
7.2.3. A consideration of specific models
Hallmarks of Sjogren syndrome include lymphocytic in € filtra￾tion, production of autoantibodies and glandular loss secondary to
epithelial apoptosis. It is still unclear whether lymphocytic infil￾tration precedes, or is necessary for, glandular apoptosis, and the
relevant antigen(s) have not been identified. The following section
groups different Sjogren syndrome models according to their po- €
tential relevance to the pathogenesis of human Sjogren syndrome. €
The grouping is somewhat arbitrary as many models could be
included in more than one category.
7.2.3.1. Infiltrating autoreactive T cells. The presence of activated,
autoreactive T cells within the lacrimal or salivary glands is a
pathognomonic feature of human Sjogren syndrome and the focus €
score (the number of mononuclear cell infiltrates containing at
least 50 inflammatory cells in a 4 mm2 glandular section), in a
minor salivary gland biopsy is an integral part of the current, in￾ternational classification criteria for Sjogren syndrome € [565,571].
Other components are the presence of serum antibodies, and
subjective and objective evidence of DED and dry mouth. Several
Sjogren syndrome models which exhibit glandular T cell in € filtration
can be included here, including the NOD, CD25KO, Scurfy, MRL/lpr,
AIRE-KO, IL-12 transgenic (Tg), C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 (Aec),
NOD.B10.H2b
, and Osteopontin (OPN) Tg mice.
In MRL/lpr mice, a genetically-determined disruption of the Fas￾Fas ligand system leads to tissue infiltration by lymphocytes, many
of which are T cells [572,573,1205]. Interestingly, the genetic
background in which the Fas mutation occurs, influences the
phenotype and severity of dacryoadenitis and goblet cell loss
[574e576]. The two most commonly used inbred laboratory strains
of mouse show a distinct bias in their ability to mount an immune
response: BALB/c mice and C57BL/6 are Th2 and Th1-skewed,
respectively [577]. This may explain why goblet cell density is
influenced by genetic background in the MRL/lpr mutation, with
goblet cell density higher in the MRL/lpr.BALB/c mouse and lower
in the MRL.lpr.B6 compared to respective wild-type controls
[578,579].
In both CD25KO and the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE) KO
mice, disrupted immune tolerance leads to accelerated lacrimal
gland destruction, with a severe phenotype [580e582]. CD25 is the
IL-2 receptor a chain, the binding arm of the heterotrimeric IL-2
receptor [583e585]. It is expressed on T and B cells. In its
absence, as in the CD25 knockout (CD25KO), cells are unable to
respond to IL-2, no T regulatory cells are generated, spontaneous
autoreactive T cells arise and these cells fail to undergo activation￾induced cell death [586,587]. CD25KO mice develop age-dependent
dacryoadenitis and systemic autoimmunity. This is also accompa￾nied by ocular surface staining, goblet cell loss and the appearance
of M3R antibodies [536,582].
The AIRE KO develop a CD4þ T-cell-mediated autoimmune
disease that targets multiple organs, including the lacrimal gland
and ocular surface [588]. The AIRE KO mouse in a NOD background,
shows severe squamous metaplasia and ocular surface staining
which parallels the level of lacrimal gland infiltration [588,589]
while the same mutation in a C57BL/6 background leads to signif￾icant goblet cell loss and CD4þ T cell infiltration of the cornea and
meibomian periglandular region, compared to wild-type controls
[590].
While there is evidence for a role for Th17þ cells in corneal
barrier disruption and sialoadenitis [516,526,591], its role in
dacryoadenitis is still controversial. Some of the autoimmune
models that have been used to investigate dacryoadenitis have both
Th1þ and Th17þ T-cells infiltrating the lacrimal gland, making it
difficult to determine the individual contributions of Th subsets
(TSP-1 KO, MRL/lpr, CD25KO, and Aec). Dacryoadenitis in CD25-IL-
17DKO appeared earlier and was more extensive than in the
CD25KO parental strain and it was accompanied by greater IFN-g￾receptor expression and caspase 3 levels [562], suggesting that IL-
17A may have a minor role in counterbalancing IFN-g. Th-1þ cells
have been implicated in colitis, experimental autoimmune uveitis
and Sjogren syndrome € [475,478,532,562,582,592]. Both NOD. IFN-g
KO, and NOD. IFN-g receptor KO, mice have ameliorated sialoade￾nitis [593] and the same pattern is observed in CD25-IFN-g DKO
[536,562]. These findings indicate that a mixture of both Th1 and
Th17 cells are involved in dacryoadenitis and that therapies tar￾geting more than one subset may be beneficial in Sjogren €
syndrome.
7.2.3.2. Disruptive TGF-b signaling. TGF-b is a pleiotropic cytokine
involved in epithelial differentiation, mitosis, cell motility, fibrosis
and immune-regulation [308]. TGF-b is critical for the induction of
CD4þFoxp3þ cells, the regulatory T cells involved in keeping other
cells in check [594], but also of T helper (Th) 17 cells [595]. TGF-b
null mice succumb to massive systemic autoimmunity, affecting
both exocrine glands, shortly after birth, making it difficult to
investigate the specific role of TGF-b in Sjogren syndrome €
[596e598]. Two other animal models with disruptive TGF-b
signaling develop moderate Sjogren syndrome with aging: the €
thrombospodin-1 knock-out (TSP-1) KO and the dominant negative
TGF-b receptor type II (DN TGFBRII). These mice develop dacryoa￾denitis and ocular surface manifestations that are accompanied by
Th1 and Th17 responses [563,599]. TSP-1KO mice also have anti￾SSA and anti-SSB serum antibodies [563]. The dual role of TGF-b
in promoting Tregs (anti-inflammatory) and generating Th17þ cells
can be appreciated further by subjecting the DN TGFBRII and
TSP1KO to DES, where Th17 cells are involved in corneal barrier
disruption [529], Interestingly, both models show a paradoxical
improvement of corneal staining compared to their own baseline
prior to exposure to DES [105,600]. This effect was shown to be DC￾mediated in the TSP-1KO mice [600]. Polymorphism in the
thrombospondin gene was found to be associated with post￾refractive surgery-related, chronic ocular surface inflammation in
active duty U.S. Army soldiers [601]. Future studies are needed to
delineate the specific role of TGF-b in Sjogren syndrome. €
7.2.3.3. Glandular apoptosis. Glandular apoptosis is another hall￾mark of Sjogren syndrome and it is present ubiquitously in almost €
all Sjogren syndrome models. It is unclear whether it follows or €
precedes immune infiltration, since the initiating trigger for
Sjogren syndrome is unknown. A recent manuscript reported that €
IkB-z-deficient, lacrimal epithelial cells exhibited enhanced
apoptosis that preceded lymphocytic infiltration, demonstrating
that epithelial cell death could be an initiating factor in Sjogren €
syndrome [602]. There is evidence suggesting that immune cells
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 466
participate in the disorganisation and apoptosis in exocrine glands.
IFN-g has been implicated in epithelial cell loss, inducing apoptosis
in salivary gland cell lines [603,604]. As noted above, NOD.IFN-g KO
and NOD.IFN-g receptor KO mice have a lower salivary gland focus
score and caspase 3 activity compared to the NOD strain [593] and
CD25-IFN-g double KO mice have significantly lower caspase 3
levels and a lesser degree of dacryoadenitis compared to the
parental CD25þKO strain [536,562]. Cultured rat and human
conjunctival goblet cells are exquisitely sensitive to IFN-g and
minute concentrations will induce apoptosis [605]. In another
report, IFN-g blocked carbachol-induced high molecular weight
glycoconjugate secretion and reduced goblet cell proliferation
[606]. The authors concluded that this could explain the goblet cell
loss and mucin deficiency in DED. These studies indicate that the
glandular epithelium can function as both an initiator and
bystander target of infiltrating lymphocytes.
7.2.3.4. B cells and immunization models. SS is accompanied by
polyclonal B cell activity and patients with Sjogren syndrome have €
an increased risk of lymphoma compared to the general population
[607e609]. Increased serum autoantibodies (anti-SSA/Ro 52 kDa,
anti-SSA/Ro 60 kDa, anti-SSB/La, rheumatoid factor, anti-a-fodrin,
antimuscarinic receptor type 3 (M3R)), have been used as diag￾nostic criteria [565,610] but some SS patients are serum autoanti￾body negative.
BAFF (B-cell activating factor) is a member of the TNF super￾family and regulates B cell survival. BAFF Tg mice, mostly used as an
SLE model when younger, develop leukocytic infiltration of sub￾mandibular glands with aging [611]. Act-1 is a negative regulator of
BAFF and CD40þ. Act-1tg and Act1 / mice develop both lacrimal
gland and salivary gland infiltration by B and T cells (salivary
gland > lacrimal gland) and have anti-SSA and anti-SSB antibodies
[612]. NOD modified mice with impaired IgG1 secretion also have
an ameliorated salivary phenotype (NOD.IL4 KO; NOD.B10.H2b.IL-4
KO; NOD. NOD.B10-H2b.C-Stat6 KO) [613,614]. Recent studies using
M3R KO mice immunized with M3R peptides demonstrated that
M3R autoreactive T cells can transfer sialodenitis to immunodefi-
cient mice [615e617]. They also demonstrated that, similar to NOD
and CD25þKO models, IFN-g is critical for inducing glandular
apoptosis, since adoptive transfer recipients of M3R peptide
immunized, M3R-IFN-g DKO cells had neither a significant
inflammation score nor showed apoptosis [616].
7.2.3.5. Effect of DES on autoimmune responses. The autoimmune
response of mice to DES has been investigated in a few instances.
Yoon and colleagues demonstrated increased conjunctival infiltra￾tion and corneal staining when 16 week-old NOD.B10.H2b mice
were subjected to DES [618]. Upon removal of DES, NOD.B10.H2b
mice had persistently lower tear production, goblet cell loss and
increased CD4þ T cells than C57BL/6 mice, indicating that DES in a
genetically susceptible strain had prolonged effects [619]. In some
other strains, such as the DN TGFBRII and TSP1KO, corneal staining
and goblet cell numbers improved after DES [600]. The interaction
between genetic susceptibility and DES deserves further study.
7.3. Animal models of meibomian gland dysfunction
Ideally, an animal model of human MGD will demonstrate the
human MGD signs, as well as the tear film and ocular surface
sequelae associated with MGD and EDE. The human MGD signs
would include, among others, meibomian gland orifice obstruction
and orifice metaplasia (a condition defined as an atypical growth
and keratinization of duct epithelium [1219]), a reduced quality and
altered lipid profile of meibum, cystic dilatation of the central duct,
and acinar atrophy and loss [36,494,495,620e627,1206]. In
particular, evidence of hyperkeratinization of the terminal meibo￾mian gland duct is important, given that this is a predominant
feature of human MGD [36,494,620e622,624,627]. In addition,
MGD, and the resulting meibum insufficiency, promote tear film
evaporation, hyperosmolarity and instability and ocular surface
stress, and lead to increased friction, inflammation, eye damage
(e.g. corneal squamous metaplasia, loss of corneal microvilli, gly￾cocalyx disruption) and visual impairment
[1,36,190,196,549,628e632,1207]. Meibum in human DED also
contains cytokeratin-positive inclusions [183].
To date, a number of animal models of MGD have been identi-
fied or created that mimic, as least in part, human MGD. Monkey
[633] and rabbit [39,634e636,1208] models that present hyper￾keratinization of the meibomian gland terminal duct epithelium
and meibomian gland orifice obstruction have been induced by
polychlorinated biphenyl poisoning [633], systemic exposure to
isotretinoin [1208] and the topical administration of epinephrine
[39,634e636]. A common histopathological finding in these mon￾key and rabbit models is an abnormal dilatation of the ducts, which
feature lumina filled with keratinized materials.
Similarly, rodent models of MGD have been discovered or
developed. These are either natural, or have been generated by
transgenic or knockout technologies, mutations, immunization,
pharmaceutical treatment, exposure to desiccating stress, or al￾terations in nutrition (Table 9). The resulting strains may feature a
variety of phenotypes, such as ductal hyperkeratinization,
obstructed meibomian gland orifices, meibum and thickened ducts
containing keratinized materials, and acinar cell atrophy, aplasia
and loss (see Table 9 for references).
The following three strains show many of these aspects.
First, is a model induced in HR-1 hairless mice by feeding them a
special diet with limited lipid content (HR-AD) [637]. This model
was developed to facilitate understanding of MGD pathophysi￾ology. After exposure to this diet for 4 weeks, mice develop
hyperkeratinization of the meibomian gland ductal epithelium, loss
of meibomian gland acini, and ultimately meibomian gland atro￾phy. Clinical examination of these mice reveals markedly plugged
(i.e. obstructed) meibomian gland orifices, telangiectasia, and a
toothpaste-like meibum compared with that of a normal eyelid. Of
particular interest, topical azithromycin treatment in this mouse
model significantly decreases the number of plugged orifices, the
keratinization of meibomian gland ductal epithelium, the meibo￾mian gland duct thickness, and the meibomian gland atrophy [637].
Azithromycin, in turn, is known to induce human meibomian gland
epithelial cell differentiation [53,638e640], and is a very common
therapy for human MGD [641].
A second model is induced by treatment with isotretinoin [642],
a known and significant risk factor for the development of human
MGD [643e652]. Treatment of rats for 3 months with isotretinoin
led to keratinization and thickening of the meibomian gland ductal
epithelium, a decrease in the quantity and size of acini, and many
degenerated acini and acinar cell casts in the meibomian gland
ducts. These isotretinoin-elicited effects could be inhibited by
treatment with dehydroepiadrosterone, presumably, according to
the investigators, through conversion to androgens [642]. Topical
androgens, in turn, have been reported to be effective in the ther￾apy of human MGD [653] (see TFOS DEWS II Sex, Gender, and
Hormones report [1222]).
A third model involves interference with growth hormone (GH)
action [57]. These include receptor (R) antagonist (A) transgenic
mice (GHA) with reduced GH, as well as GHR KO mice with no GH
activity. Many of the GHA and GHR KO meibomian glands present
with hyperkeratinized and thickened meibomian gland ducts that
contain cornified materials, secretory acini inserting into duct
walls, and poorly differentiated acini. The GHR KO and GHA mice
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 467
Table 9
Rodent models for altered meibomian (MG) and/or sebaceous (SG) gland structure and/or function.
Condition Glandular effect Reference
Gene knockout
Acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase-1 MG atrophy (Yagyu et al., 2000) [660]
Autoimmune regulatory T cell infiltration in MGs (Yeh et al., 2009) [590]
Barx2 MG defects (Tsau et al., 2011) [1141]
Blimp1 Enlarged MGs (Horsley et al., 2006) [1142]
CCAAT-enhancer-binding proteins a and b MG atrophy, reduced number of differentiated MG acinar
cells
(House et al., 2010) [1143]
CD147 Lower number of MG acini, loss of lipid-filled meibocytes (Mauris et al., 2015) [1144]
Cu, Zn-superoxide dismutase-1 Increased oxidative stress of the MG acinar epithelium (Ibrahim et al., 2014) [1139]
Ectodysplasin-A No MG (Cui et al., 2005
Wang et al., 2016
Kuramoto et al., 2011)
[672,1145,1146]
Ectodysplasin-A receptor No MG (Naito et al., 2002) [1147]
Growth hormone receptor MGs feature hyperkeratinized and thickened ducts
containing cornified materials, secretory acini inserting into
duct walls, poorly differentiated acini, and reduced MG sizes
(Liu et al., 2016a) [57]
Krüppel-like family 5 (conditional disruption) Malformed MG (Kenchegowda et al., 2011) [1148]
Map3k1, Dkk2, c-Jun, Egfr, Shp2, Map3k1/jnk1, Map3k1/
Rhoa (systemic or conditional knockouts)
MG hypoplasia (Meng et al., 2014) [1149]
Melanocortin-5 receptor Decreased production of sebaceous lipids (Thiboutot et al., 2000) [1150]
Smad4 Ectopic row of hair follicles in place of MGs (Huang et al., 2009) [1151]
Stearoyl-coenzyme A desaturase 1 No MG (Miyazaki et al., 2001) [1152]
Stearoyl-coenzyme A desaturase loss of function (Scd3-Cre￾induced, diphtheria chain A toxin-mediated depletion)
MGD-like ocular surface effects (Dahlhoff et al., 2016) [1153]
Tumor necrosis factor receptor -associated factor 6 Modified MGs (Naito et al., 2002) [1147]
Transgenic or gene overexpression
Biglycan overexpression, under control of the keratocyte￾specific keratocan promoter
MG aplasia (Hayashi et al., 2005) [1154]
c-Myc overexpression Enhanced sebum production Zouboulis and Boschnakow, 2001) [1155]
Ectodysplasin receptor Enlarged MGs (Chang et al., 2009) [1156]
Ectodysplasin-A SG hyperplasia (Cui et al., 2003) [1157]
Growth hormone receptor antagonist MGs feature hyperkeratinized and thickened ducts
containing cornified materials, secretory acini inserting into
duct walls, poorly differentiated acini, and reduced MG sizes
(Liu et al., 2016a) [57]
Human apolipoprotein C1 MG atrophy (Jong et al., 1998) [1158]
K14-noggin Formation of ectopic pilosebaceous units at the expense of
MGs
(Plikus et al., 2004) [1159]
Kera-rtTA/tet-O-TGFa (ectopic stromal expression of TGF-a) Abnormal MG morphogenesis (Dong et al., 2015) [1160]
Keratin 5 e glucocorticoid receptor No MG (Cascallana et al., 2005) [1161]
Rat erbB2 overexpression in basal layer of mouse epidermis,
under control of the bovine keratin 5 promoter
SG enlargement (Kiguchi et al., 2000) [1162]
Rescued fatty acid transport protein 4 null Abnormal MG development (Lin et al., 2013) [1163]
Smad7 or parathormone-related protein overexpression SG hyperplasia (Zouboulis and Boschnakow, 2001) [1155]
Mutation
“Rhino” MG ductal hyperkeratinization, acinar cell loss and eventual
atrophy
(Jester et al., 1988) [1164]
“Rough fur” (ruf) SG hypertrophy (Park et al., 2001) [1165]
ADAM metallopeptidase domain 17, also called tumor
necrosis factor-a-converting enzyme
No MG (Hassemer et al., 2013) [1166]
Downless locus MG defects (Majumder et al., 1998
Naito et al., 2002) [1147,1167]
Elongation Of Very Long Chain Fatty Acids gene Protruding orifices and anatomical changes in MGs (McMahon et al., 2014) [1168]
Protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 13 like No MG (Toonen et al., 2012) [1169]
Stratifin (14-3-3s) MG atrophy in aged heterozygotes (Lu et al., 2011) [1170]
Immunization
Murine immunization with a human monoclonal anti-DNA
antibody, bearing a major Id 16/6Id
Hypertrophic MGs Chan et al., 1995) [1171]
Natural
“Crinkled” No MG (Naito et al., 2002) [1147]
Age MG atrophy (Parfitt et al., 2013) [1172]
Pharmaceutical
Isotretinoin Keratinization and thickening of MG ductal epithelium,
decreased number and size of MG acini, multiple
degenerated MG acini
(Ibrahim et al., 2017) [642]
Environmental & pharmaceutical
Desiccating stress and scopolamine Increase in MG basal cell proliferation (Suhalim et al., 2014) [656]
Nutrition
HR-1 hairless mice fed special diet with limited lipid
content
Hyperkeratinization of the MG ductal epithelium,
toothpaste-like meibum, markedly plugged MG orifices,
and loss and atrophy of MG acini,
(Miyake et al., 2016) [637]
n-3 fatty acid deficiency Decreased MG meibum secretion (Tanaka et al., 2015) [1173]
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 468
also have significantly smaller meibomian glands, as compared to
wildtype controls [57]. Given that GH levels decline with aging, it is
possible that this decrease contributes to the development of age￾related MGD [1216].
Recently, Jester et al. have hypothesized that the primary target in
MGD is the meibomian gland, as compared to duct hyper￾keratinisation [654]. This hypothesis is based on studies in age￾related [655] and evaporative stress mouse models [656]. They pro￾pose that key elements of MGD are glandular atrophy through a loss
of meibocyte progenitors. Jester et al. also report that desiccating
stress in mice results in a phase of acinar hyperproliferation, with a
change in protein to lipid ratio causing an increase in lipid viscosity.
According to this view, epithelial plugs within the gland ducts do not
contain fully mature keratins [654]. Obata and colleagues have also
found an age-related correlation between meibomian gland acinar
epithelial cell loss and aging [495,624]. In contrast, other researchers
have identified keratinization, meibomian gland orifice obstruction
and metaplasia associated with human MGD during both aging [627]
and in general [36,494,620e622,624]. Further, large quantities of
nonlipid, protein-like inclusions that stain for cytokeratins have also
been identified in abnormal meibum from DED patients [183]. These
inclusions may possibly represent the keratinized materials that
appear in the turbid meibum of elderly people [657].
Some of the mouse models listed in Table 9 may be also useful for
studies on evaporative DED and corresponding ocular surface
sequelae. Consistent with this proposal are the observations that MG
absence in X-linked anhidrotic/hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is
associated with increased tear evaporation, scarce and shortened
corneal microvilli (note: which would disrupt the glycocalyx [658]),
corneal defects (e.g. neovascularization, keratinization, and squa￾mous metaplasia), and ocular surface inflammation [1145,1215].
Further, MG atrophy in acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase-1
knockout mice is associated with corneal erosions [660].
Additional mouse models that display marked alterations in
sebaceous gland structure and function (Table 9) may also serve as
MGD models. However, studies have yet to be performed to
examine these possibilities.
7.4. The microbiome of the ocular surface
There is evidence that the gut and ocular surface microbiome
may influence the occurrence of DED. The ocular surface is
constantly exposed to the environment but, compared to the lid
margins, is a relatively sterile site, based on studies using
conjunctival swabs [661,662]. The ocular surface microbiota are
regulated by numerous antimicrobial factors produced by the
lacrimal glands, goblet cells and conjunctiva, which are secreted
into the tears, such as lactoferrin, lysosyme, defensins a and b and
IgA [459e461,663]. Lately, there has been great interest in in￾teractions between the host and the microbiota.
The term microbiota refers to the community of microbes that
inhabit a particular site, and the microbiome refers to their collective
genomes. Techniques used to assess the microbiome include tradi￾tional microbial culture and cultivation-independent techniques
such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and 16S ribosomal DNA
amplification and sequencing [664e666]. The literature has been
unclear as to the presence of microbiota at the ocular surface
[665,667,668], with some authors finding a stable presence, which
may be modified by disease, while others indicate that microorgan￾isms are present transiently, prior to their annihilation by ocular
surface defence mechanisms. Recently a consensus has been reached
that the ocular surface is a paucibacterial environment, but is not
sterile [665,668].
The most common microbes cultured from the conjunctival
surface, using traditional culture techniques, include Staphylo￾coccus and Propionibacterium acnes, while more recent techniques
indicate that there are many more genera to be found
[664,665,668,669]. Swabs of the lid margins yield similar species,
albeit at a higher count of colony-forming units [667].
Understanding the role of the microbiome in DED is important
as this could provide a potential avenue for treatment. In a study by
Graham et al., the bacterial population of the posterior lid margin
and lower conjunctival sac of patients with and without DED were
assessed using both conventional culture and 16S rDNA PCR [669].
A significantly greater number of bacteria were detected using the
16S rDNA PCR technique as compared to conventional culture
which largely yielded coagulase negative staphylococci [669].
Interestingly, bacteria that are otherwise rarely associated with the
ocular surface (Rhodococcus erythropolis, Klebsiella oxytoca, and
Erwinia species) were identified in inflammatory DED, as well as at
the normal ocular surface [669]. A significant difference in the
mean bacterial count was found between the control group and the
moderate to severe DED groups, a result supported by others [670].
Moreover, the authors found that a reduced goblet cell density was
associated with greater bacterial presence [669]. Another study,
comparing the ocular, oral and intestinal microbiome of controls
and Sjogren syndrome patients showed that there was no differ- €
ence in the ocular microbiome between the two groups [668].
Decreased diversity was noted in both in the oral and gut micro￾biome and specific changes in genera were observed. There was a
relative decrease in the abundance of Bacteroides, Parabacteroides,
Faecalibacterium, and Prevotella, with greater relative abundances
of Pseudobutyrivibrio, Escherichia/Shigella, Blautia, and Strepto￾coccus in Sjogren syndrome patients compared to controls. €
Furthermore, eye and systemic severity scores inversely correlated
with microbial diversity [668].
Another study reported changes to the ocular surface microbiota
that occur in the early stages of Sjogren syndrome-like disease in €
transpondin knock-out (TSP-1KO) mice, leading to the recom￾mendation that TSP-1 derived peptides may be a means by which
to reduce commensal flora and the resulting inflammation [671].
Tools to investigate the role of the microbiome in homeostasis
and disease states involve the use of germ-free mice or the sub￾jection of mice to a cocktail of antibiotics, either in drinking water
or by oral gavage. Antibiotic treatment will induce changes in the
bacterial community, leading to a dysbiotic state. Recently it was
reported that mice subjected to DES, that drank oral antibiotics for
14 days prior to DES had greater goblet cell loss, greater T cell
infiltration and worse corneal staining than mice that were sub￾jected to the same protocol but drank normal water [668]. 16S
sequencing of the stools of these mice indicated a decrease in
Clostridium and an increase in Enterobacter, Escherichia/Shigella,
and Pseudomonas after antibiotics þ DES for 10 days.
A germ-free environment is very detrimental to ocular ho￾meostasis in the mouse, as it predisposes to or worsens Sjogren €
syndrome-like disease in non-autoimmune and genetically pre￾disposed mice, respectively [668,672]. Non-autoimmune C57BL/6
mice raised in germ-free conditions have Sjogren syndrome-like €
features, inclusive of dacryoadenitis and decreased EGF concen￾tration in tears. This was accompanied by corneal staining, goblet
cell loss and pathogenic CD4þ T cell infiltration [672]. On the other
hand, germ-free CD25KO mice have early onset of dacryoadenitis
and greater numbers of CD4þIFN-gþ cells infiltrating the lacrimal
glands of RAG1KO recipients. These results suggest that signals
provided by commensal bacteria and/or their metabolites are
capable of modulating ocular health.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 469
7.5. Cellular models of dry eye in vitro
Ocular surface cell cultures have been used to explore the roles
of multiple factors and pathways involved in the pathophysiology
and possible treatment of DED. Several such cultures have also been
reported to serve as DED models in vitro.
Three DED models use the cornea. One model utilizes rabbit
corneal cultures with experimental time frames of up to 21 days
[673]. Studies with this model have used optical coherence to￾mography (OCT) to monitor the impact of DES, with a focus on
changes in corneal layer thickness and in stromal scattering prop￾erties [673]. Another DED model in vitro utilizes human recon￾structed corneal epithelium maintained in a controlled
environmental setting (relative humidity <40% and 40  C temper￾ature) for 24 h and up to 72 h [674]. Culture conditions are controlled
to mimic DED, and thereby permit identification of biomarkers that
may be predictive of corneal damage and response to treatment. A
third DED model uses human reconstructed corneal epithelium to
assess the effects of severe osmotic stress and associated treatment
on inflammatory pathway activity and barrier integrity [675].
A fourth DED model uses immortalized human meibomian
gland epithelial cells [50]. This model involves exposure of these
cells in vitro to isotretinoin [45], a well-known risk factor for the
development of human MGD in vivo [643e652]. Exposure of hu￾man meibomian gland epithelial cells to isotretinoin: [a] alters the
expression of thousands of genes, including an upregulation of
genes for some inflammatory mediators (e.g. IL-8 and IL-1b), pro￾teases (e.g. MMP-9), MAPK signaling, lytic vesicles, apoptosis and
cell death, and suppresses genes linked to DNA replication, cell
cycle, RNA transport and mitochondria; [b] increases the levels of
pro-IL-1b, IL-1b and MMP-9 proteins; [c] decreases the signaling of
the cell growth and survival mediator, phosphoinositide 3-kinase￾protein kinase B; and [d] inhibits cell proliferation and induces
cellular atrophy and death (e.g. by apoptosis, necrosis and/or
autophagy) [45]. It is possible that these effects may be responsible
for the acinar epithelial cell degeneration and atrophy, and reduced
and abnormal secretions, that occur following isotretinoin induc￾tion of human MGD in vivo [643e652].
8. Human disease. Etiological classification of DED
It is still useful to discuss DED under two major headings, that of
ADDE and EDE (Table 5).
9. Aqueous-deficient dry eye (ADDE)
ADDE is subdivided into Sjogren syndrome dry eye (SSDE) and €
non-Sjogren syndrome dry eye (NSDE). €
9.1. Sjogren Syndrome and Sj € ogren Syndrome dry eye €
9.1.1. Introduction
Sjogren syndrome is a chronic autoimmune disorder charac- €
terized by immune cell infiltration of exocrine glands (exocrinop￾athy or epitheliitis) and systemic complications due to
autoantibody production, immune complex deposition and lym￾phocytic infiltration of many organs [676] (Table 10). The preva￾lence of primary Sjogren syndrome (pSS) in the USA has been €
estimated to be 0.6e1%, affecting between 0.4 million to 3.1 million
adults [677]. However, this estimate is different than that of
another study, which reported Sjogren syndrome af € flicts less than
40,000 people in the USA [678]. More recent data indicate that the
average annual incidence of pSS in a physician-diagnosed, popu￾lation-based cohort in the USA is 5.8 per 100,000 [679], and that the
prevalence of pSS in a geographically well-defined population in
Omstead County, Minnesota, is between 2 and 10/10,000 in￾habitants [680]. If translatable to the USA population as a whole,
this estimate would indicate that between 65,000 and 326,000
people in the USA have pSS.
Sjogren syndrome occurs predominantly in women, with a fe￾male/male ratio of 9:1 [557e559, 561] anditmaylead to a very severe
form of DED [681]. The disease may result from a range of aberrant
immune responses to environmental and viral triggers occurring in
genetically susceptible individuals. Hormonal environment is also
important (see TFOS DEWS II Sex, Gender & Hormones report
[1222]). It involves a loss of immune tolerance, the presentation of
autoantigens and dysregulation of both the innate and adaptive im￾mune systems [682,683]. The lacrimal and salivary glands are major
targets of the epitheliitis, leading to gland destruction and the key
symptoms of DED and dry mouth (sicca symptoms).
Historically, Sjogren syndrome was described as a condition in €
its own right, pSS or as part of a systemic autoimmune disorder
(secondary Sjogren syndrome - sSS), such as rheumatoid arthritis, €
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Wegener's granulomatosis
[684]. More recently, the American College of Rheumatology has
recommended that the diagnosis of Sjogren syndrome should be €
given to any patient who fulfulls the diagnostic criteria of Sjogren €
syndrome [565] without distinguishing it as primary or secondary,
recognizing them both to be a manifestation of immune dysregu￾lation. The Subcommittee recognizes the value of this approach but
the older terminology is retained here in relation to past literature.
Symptoms of DED and dry mouth are a major feature of Sjogren €
syndrome that are a result, at least in part, of infiltration of the
salivary and lacrimal glands by T and B lymphocytes, dendritic cells
(DCs), macrophages and other mononuclear cells, leading to tissue
dysfunction or destruction [683]. In SSDE the lacrimal glands are
considered to be primary targets of immune attack. This is less
certain for the conjunctival epithelium and goblet cells, which are
also involved clinically.
The signs and symptoms of SSDE are similar to those of NSDE.
The ocular symptoms include blurred vision, grittiness and ocular
discomfort and clinical signs include tear film instability, corneal
and conjunctival staining, goblet cell loss and epithelial metaplasia
[382,401,685,686]. However, the onset of SSDE is earlier and where
populations of patients with either NSDE or SSDE are compared,
SSDE patients are consistently younger and their disease more se￾vere [610,687] suggesting a more rapid progression. There is also a
greater risk of blindness with SSDE [688]. The higher frequency of
severe MGD in patients with SSDE compared to NSDE contributes
to its severity [375].
9.1.2. Hormonal influences
SS affects more women than men and its prevalence increases in
Table 10
Manifestations in primary Sjogren Syndrome. €
Non-specific features
Musculoskeletal symptoms, Raynaud's phenomenon,
CNS e Symptoms of fatigue
Exocrine Epitheliitis (glandular)
Lacrimal and Salivary Glandse
Other glands - pancreas
Parenchymal Epitheliitis (extraglandular)
Bronchial, hepatic, renal - peri-epithelial lymphocytic infiltration
Endocrine Gland Involvement
Thyroid, adrenals, ovaries
Immunocomplex-mediated disease
Vasculitis - affecting small vessels of the skin, nerves, kidney as a result of B-cell
hyperactivity)
Lymphoproliferative
B-cell lymphoma
From Ref. [697].
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 470
post-menopausal women [566,567,689]. Sex-related differences in
the prevalence of DED have been linked, at least in part, to the ef￾fects of sex steroids (e.g. androgens and estrogens). These endo￾crine actions are detailed in the TFOS DEWS II Sex, Hormone &
Gender report [1222]. In brief, sex steroids act on the meibomian
gland, lacrimal gland, conjunctiva and cornea. Hormonal influences
occur most likely after local, intracrine synthesis and appear to be
mediated primarily through nuclear, and possibly membrane, re￾ceptors. Sex steroids impact multiple structural and functional as￾pects of the ocular surface and adnexa, including tissue
architecture, gene expression, protein synthesis, immune activity,
epithelial cell dynamics, aqueous secretion, meibum production,
mucous output and tear film stability. For example, androgen
deficiency has been linked to the development, and androgen
administration to the treatment, of lacrimal gland inflammation
(e.g. Sjogren syndrome), meibomian gland dysfunction (e.g. €
Sjogren syndrome and aging), corneal glycocalyx disruption, ocular €
surface damage, tear film instability, and aqueous-deficient and
evaporative DED. In contrast, the precise role of estrogens in the
physiology and pathophysiology of ocular surface and adnexal tis￾sues is unclear and, in some cases, controversial. A foremost
consideration is that a number of the sex steroid effects may be sex￾specific (i.e. unique to males or females) [36,690e693]. Recognition
of these sex-related differences and the determination of their
underlying basis (e.g. sex steroid action) are extremely important.
(A full discussion is provided in the TFOS DEWS II Sex, Hormones
and Gender report [1222]).
9.1.3. Etiology: genetic susceptibility
Genetic susceptibility plays a role in the etiology of Sjogren €
syndrome. A number of associations have been made between pSS
and gene loci or specific genes [694]. (Table 11) Increased risk of pSS
has been associated with HLA II, IL-12A, BLK, STAT4, CXCR5 and
IRF5 in a recent study of subjects of European descent, fulfilling the
European-American consensus criteria [694]. Loci of interest are
not identical in all geographic locations, indicating ethnic differ￾ences in susceptibility [695].
Some of the clinical and immunological similarities between
pSS and SLE may have a genetic background. A number of Sjogren €
syndrome-associated gene polymorphisms including the MHC-II,
STAT4, IRF5, BLK, and TNIP1 genes are shared with SLE and other
autoimmune conditions. However, the genes CXCR5 and GTF2I,
have been determined as risk factors only in Sjogren syndrome and €
conversely, many genes associated with of risk of SLE are not found
in Sjogren syndrome € [695].
Burbelo et al. [695] have proposed that the Sjogren syndrome- €
associated genes result in immune dysregulation via at least three
pathways: 1. Activation of the IFN signaling pathway. 2. Activation
of B-cell function antibody production and clearance pathways.
3. Activation of NFkB activity pathways.
A general prediction is that the possession of one or more such
genetic risk factors influences affected individuals in terms of
clinical manifestations, onset, severity and progression of the dis￾ease. Of interest is that none of the genes that confer risk are related
to glandular physiology or sex. All polymorphisms occur in non￾coding sequences, reflecting an epigenetic role that determines
gene expression rather than gene product. All of the risk genes
relate to the performance of the immune system.
9.1.4. Etiology: viral infection
The etiology of Sjogren syndrome remains unclear and involves €
multiple factors. One of the theories of the onset of Sjogren syn- €
drome relates to viral infection. Indeed, various associations be￾tween viral infection and DED have been reported, including Hep B,
HLTV1, HIV and Epstein Barr virus (EBV). Importantly, it has been
suggested that the generation of tertiary or ectopic lymphoid
structures (TLS) in response to viral infection may provide a site for
autoantibody production in genetically disposed individuals [696].
9.1.5. The inflammatory process in Sjogren syndrome €
Our understanding of the destructive inflammatory process that
occurs in the lacrimal glands of Sjogren syndrome patients is partly €
inferred from the study of labial minor salivary gland biopsies. The
typical pathologic lesion in the minor salivary glands consists of
clusters of round cell infiltrates whose composition depends on
lesion severity. CD4þ T cells predominate in milder lesions and
CD8þ T cells and B cells in more severe lesions [697]. The distri￾bution of other infiltrating immune cells also correlates with the
degree of inflammation, with macrophages increasing and inter￾digitating dendritic cells decreasing with increasing severity [698].
Patients with Sjogren syndrome have been categorized at diagnosis €
into distinct groups according to whether the predominating im￾mune response is T or B cell mediated [699] and whether the T cell
response is mainly of Th1, Th2 or Th17 type. According to Mout￾sopoulos [697], Th1 responses are the most common, Th2 cytokines
predominate in mild lesions and Th17 reactivity correlates with
greater lesion severity.
Of particular concern in Sjogren syndrome is the formation of €
germinal centres, which are predictive of a higher risk of lymphoma
[700,701].
9.1.5.1. T cells. T cells, which play a major role in Sjogren syndrome €
inflammation, can be divided into several subsets according to the
cytokines that they make. Th1 cells produce IFN-g and IL-18;
Th17 cells produce IL-17 and IL21 and Th2 cells secrete IL-4, IL-5
and IL-13. Historically, Sjogren syndrome has been identi € fied as a
Th-1-dependent autoimmune disease, with increased concentra￾tions of IFN-g in tears, conjunctiva, saliva, lacrimal and salivary
gland and blood [235,478,522,582,702]. Moreover, a Th1/Th2
imbalance, with high levels of IFN-g in blood, salivary glands, tears
or conjunctiva correlates with a more severe phenotype, which
may help to differentiate Sjogren syndrome-determined aqueous €
tear deficiency from a non-Sjogren syndrome aqueous tear de € fi-
ciency [532,703].
Recently, Th17 cells have emerged as players in the pathogenesis
of Sjogren syndrome and the interaction between Th1 and €
Th17 cells is starting to be elucidated. There is evidence for the
presence of IL-17 in fluids such as the tears, saliva, serum and sy￾novial fluid and in tissue lesions themselves in patients with
Sjogren syndrome € [704e706]. Data from animal models have
shown a pro-inflammatory role for IL-17 in sialoadenitis, while its
specific role in lacrimal gland inflammation is still under debate
[536,562,581,582,591,707,708].
9.1.5.2. Epithelial cells. A contributor to glandular inflammation is
the activation of acinar and ductal epithelial cells to perform
Table 11
Sjogren syndrome-associated non-HLA genes. €
Gene Gene Function
STAT4 Transcription Factor
IRF5 Transcription Factor
IL12A Cytokine
BLK B cell kinase
CXCR5 Chemokine
TNIP NFkB signaling
GTF2I Transcription Factor
TNFAIP3 NFkB signaling
From Refs. [694,1174].
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 471
immune functions and act as non-professional APCs whereby they
mediate the recruitment and activation of almost all types of im￾mune cells that drive the activation and differentiation of T and B
cells. The factors which trigger epithelial activation are not known,
but it has been suggested that latent viral infection (see above) or
other intrinsic factors are responsible for their activation, in the
context of an appropriate genetic and environmental background
[709]. Activated salivary gland epithelial cells express a range of
immunomodulatory molecules implicated in innate and acquired
immune responses. They can also present autoantigens released
from exosomal vesicles [710] or apoptotic bodies [711]. They
therefore play an important role in initiating and perpetuating the
local autoimmune process in the salivary glands, in Sjogren syn- €
drome. A key feature of the process is that while infiltrating lym￾phocytes remain activated, the activated glandular epithelial cells
undergo apoptotic cell death [712]. It is yet to be determined
whether lacrimal gland epithelial cells play an analogous role.
9.1.5.3. B cells. B cell hyperactivity is now recognised as a central
element of Sjogren syndrome, underscoring the loss of immune €
tolerance. It is manifested by hypergammaglobulinaemia, cry￾oglobulinaemia and the production of multiple autoantibodies,
directed, for instance, against a-fodrin, the M3 muscarinic receptor,
and the ribonucleoprotein components Ro52 and Ro60 (anti-Ro/
SSA) and La (anti-La/SSB). The latter are included among the clas￾sification criteria for Sjogren syndrome and correlate with early €
disease onset, parotid gland enlargement, extraglandular mani￾festations and lymphocytic glandular infiltration [683].
B cells fulfill other functions besides producing autoantibodies,
by acting as APCs and secreting cytokines that can sustain the im￾mune response [713].
9.1.5.4. Dendritic cells. Dendritic cells help orchestrate the immune
response. There is evidence of cross-talk between dendritic cells
and epithelial cells. Epithelial cells secrete inflammatory cytokines
that can activate dendritic cells and T-cells and these in turn can
further activate the epithelium. For example, IFN-g-stimulated
expression of MHC-II and HLA-DR, a ligand for the T-cell receptor,
by epithelial cells, is well documented in the literature [714].
Expression of HLA-DR by both epithelium and DCs has been noted
previously and recently used as an endpoint in clinical trials for
DED [381,715e717].
9.1.5.5. Autoantibodies. Circulating autoantibodies in Sjogren syn- €
drome contribute to its pathophysiology and can be of diagnostic
importance [718]. Autoantibodies directed against Ro/SSA and La/
SSB autoantigens are one of the recommended diagnostic tests for
Sjogren syndrome € [684,719].
Similarly, autoantibodies against the M3 muscarinic receptor can
be found in a subset of Sjogren syndrome patients, and have been €
considered to be pathogenic [720]. Some studies showed that these
autoantibodies have agonistic (ie., stimulating) activity whereas
others showed that they have antagonistic (ie., inhibitory) activity
[721e724], although the difference may be methodological. The
prevalence of these antibodies in the sera of Sjogren syndrome €
patients varies considerably, which questions their usefulness for
diagnostic or prognostic purposes [720].
9.1.6. The lacrimal gland in Sjogren syndrome €
The loss of aqueous tear flow in Sjogren syndrome is a result of €
inflammatory cell infiltration of the lacrimal glands which leads to
acinar and duct destruction. Infiltrating lymphocytes, epithelial,
endothelial and neural cells are all potential sources of inflamma￾tory cytokines and other mediators that are responsible for lacrimal
tissue damage. Additionally, inflammatory changes within the
gland may lead to a decrease in lacrimal secretion by reason of
damage to secretomotor innervation, or inhibition of neurotrans￾mitter release or action by cytokines or antibodies [725]. The
lacrimal glands in Sjogren syndrome are heavily in € filtrated with
mononuclear cells, the majority of which are T lymphocytes, with a
lesser number of B cells and plasma cells (Fig. 11) [726]. These T cells
express the activation marker, IL-2R, and contain cytotoxic granules
such as granzyme A [727,728]. The degree of lymphocyte infiltra￾tion of the lacrimal glands correlates well with lacrimal secretion.
Poor reflex tear secretion on nasal stimulation correlates with the
presence of Sjogren syndrome autoantibodies and with both €
lacrimal and salivary lymphocyte infiltration in DED patients [729].
According to earlier reports, as in salivary gland biopsies, CD4þ T
cells predominate over CD8þ cells in the lacrimal gland infiltrate,
while B cells make up the smallest numbers.
Because of the constraints on using lacrimal gland biopsies for
investigative purposes there would be great value in setting up
prospective, post-mortem studies of lacrimal pathology in well￾characterized Sjogren syndrome cases and NSDE, to further our €
understanding of natural history and to identify the likely time
points for therapeutic intervention.
9.1.7. The conjunctiva in Sjogren syndrome €
It is not known if the conjunctiva is a primary target of inflam￾mation in Sjogren syndrome or whether changes in it are secondary €
to lacrimal gland inflammation and the onset of DED. Much of what
is known about the pathologic events in the conjunctiva of patients
Fig. 11. Histopathology of the lacrimal gland in various forms of DED. (a) In SSDE there is marked intralobular lymphocytic infiltration (:) and fibrosis is not apparent. (b) In a
patient with NSDE inflammatory cell infiltration is limited and again, fibrosis is scarcely detected (:). The acini maintain an almost normal structure. (c) By contrast, in a patient
with chronic graft-vs-host disease (GVHD) there is marked interstitial periductal fibrosis (arrows) in addition to the lymphocytic infiltration. The periphery of the lobules is
irregularly replaced by fibrotic tissue. (Courtesy of Y. Ogawa).
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 472
with DED is based on the study of conjunctival impression cytology
specimens, which provide information about the epithelium, but
not of the full thickness conjunctiva. Therefore, the findings of Stern
et al. [488] in conjunctival biopsy specimens from patients with
either SSDE or NSDE are of great interest, particularly because there
was no qualitative or quantitative difference in infiltrating cells and
of activation markers between groups. A summary of inflammatory
events in the conjunctiva of patients with both SSDE and NSDE is
presented in Table 12.
Stern et al. demonstrated large numbers of infiltrating lym￾phocytes in both SSDE and NSDE specimens, which were mostly
CD4þT cells but included CD8þ cells [488]. T cells were mainly in the
anterior substantia propria and subepithelium and rarely in the
epithelium. A small number of B cells were also present. Immuno￾reactivity for major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II an￾tigens indicated the expression of both HLA-DR (a ligand for the T￾cell receptor) and HLA-DQ (an essential accessory molecule for
antigen presentation), not only by lymphocytes, but also by
conjunctival epithelial cells, indicating a possible role for them as
non-professional APCs.
Additionally, ICAM-1 immunoreactivity was detected on
vascular endothelial cells, infiltrating lymphocytes in the substantia
propria and on resident epithelial cells. ICAM-1, as a cell surface
adhesion molecule that facilitates lymphocyte homing and entry
into target tissues, is of importance during inflammation [464,730].
Increased expression of LFA-1, the T cell ligand for ICAM-1, was also
detected. It was noted that expression of ICAM-1 by resident
epithelial cells encouraged cell contact between infiltrating lym￾phocytes and the epithelial cells, facilitating apoptotic epithelial
cell damage and that expression of ICAM-1 by infiltrating lym￾phocytes could provide a signaling molecule for antigen presenta￾tion [731,732].
9.1.8. The meibomian glands in Sjogren syndrome €
It is not known if the meibomian glands are an autoimmune
target in Sjogren syndrome. In a study by Shimazaki et al., patients €
with Sjogren syndrome were found to have more severe ocular €
surface changes (as verified by vital staining) even when they had
the same tear production (as verified by Schirmer's test) as age￾matched NSDE [375]. Sjogren syndrome patients had a higher €
prevalence of MGD, a higher tear evaporation rate and more severe
MGD, (57.9% in the Sjogren group vs. 18.5% in NSDE individuals). €
The combination of ADDE with MGD-associated EDE is considered
to amplify the dry eye state [207].
A greater disturbance of meibomian gland architecture has also
been observed by confocal microscopy in SSDEerelated MGD than
in NSDE, MGD and in healthy controls. Meibomian glands in
Sjogren syndrome were reported to show more peri-glandular €
inflammation and higher acinar cell reflectivity compared to
normal controls and MGD patients without Sjogren syndrome €
[733]. There were no differences between the meibomian glands in
pSS and sSS. Signs of obstructive MGD were also similar in both pSS
and sSS (SLE and rheumatoid arthritis) [1201].
The question arises as to why the prevalence and degree of MGD
is higher in Sjogren syndrome. One explanation could be that the €
meibomian glands are a primary autoimmune target in this disease,
although there is no evidence for this possibility. Alternatively, they
could be influenced directly by inflammatory cells or cytokines
arising locally in the conjunctiva or delivered to the conjunctival sac
in the lacrimal secretion [426,687]. Another proposal is that, in
severe disease, the loss of reflex sensory drive seen in the lacrimal
gland may similarly affect the maintenance of meibomian gland
secretion. A further explanation is the androgen deficiency in
Sjogren syndrome (see TFOS DEWS II Sex, Gender and Hormones €
report [1222]).
9.1.9. The ocular surface in severe SS e squamous metaplasia
In advanced DED, including Sjogren syndrome, a process of €
squamous metaplasia can occur inwhich the moist epithelial mucosa
is converted to an epidermalised, non-wettable tissue by a process of
transdifferentiation. There is a modification of the epithelial glyco￾calyx, a loss of goblet cells and keratinization of the conjunctival and
corneal epithelia, with the aberrant expression of cornified envelope
precursor proteins, including the small proline-rich proteins (SPRRs),
involucrin, late envelope proteins (LEPs) and filaggrin.
Squamous metaplasia is a response to chronic inflammation,
with IL-1 b and IFNg playing a key role in the process. The
expression of the relevant genes precedes the squamous phenotype
[478]. Both cytokines have been demonstrated in excess at the
ocular surface in DED. IL-1b is a potent inducer of inflammation and
stimulates the production of many proinflammatory cytokines at
the ocular surface, including IL-6, IL-8, TNF-a, and interferons [453].
The levels of IL-1a, IL-1b and TNF-alpha are increased in the tears
and conjunctiva in pSS and in animal models of DED [535,734,735]
and there is a significant correlation between IL-1 b expression by
human conjunctival epithelial cells and pathological keratinization
of the ocular surface, using SPRR1B expression as a measure of
squamous metaplasia [589].
The role IFN-g in the process of squamous metaplasia has been
studied. This cytokine is released at the ocular surface by infil￾trating Th1 cells and NK cells. It can promote goblet cell loss,
epithelial apoptosis and keratinization of the conjunctival epithe￾lium in a DES mouse model of DED [478,530] and is an important
contributor to squamous metaplasia in human DED [532]. It has
been demonstrated to upregulate the expression of cornified en￾velope precursors in keratinocytes [736], corneal epithelial cells
[737] and in conjunctival epithelial cells from patients with Sjogren €
syndrome [738,739].
Macrophages and T cells have been studied in mice and humans
by McNamara's group. In a series of studies they examined the AIRE
KO mouse (a Sjogren syndrome model) and human Sj € ogren syn- €
drome biopsies of conjunctival tissue [580]. These studies have
shown that homing of autoreactive CD4þ T cells to the eyes of AIRE￾deficient mice promotes both macrophage infiltration and the local
release of IL-1 [453]. In adoptive transfer studies, it was shown that
autoreactive CD4þ T cells can initiate local inflammation at the
ocular surface by activating IL-1R1 signaling in resident epithelial
cells [453,589] which sustains inflammation through the local
retention of the infiltrating T cells. Depletion of ocular surface
macrophages by the subconjunctival injection of clodronate lipo￾somes [580] decreases the signs of DED, such as lissamine green
staining and epithelial SPRR expression, supporting their role in the
development of ocular surface metaplasia. Similarly, depletion of
APCs during the induction of DES blunted the DED phenotype [479].
IL-1b may also promote squamous metaplasia by inducing the
expression of small proline rich proteins (SPRRs) which are mini￾mally expressed in non-keratinized mucosal tissues but become
overexpressed in response to stress or inflammation [453,478,740].
Li et al. [453] demonstrated the induction of SPRR by the addition of
recombinant IL-1b to cultured human conjunctival epithelial cells,
through activation of a p38 MAPK pathway, which appears to be a
common intermediate of both the IL-1b and IFN-g signaling cas￾cades. SPRRs have been shown to trap conjunctival goblet cells
during DES and also to be upregulated by IFN-gamma [427].
The importance of IL-1 in this process is supported in additional
ways. Ocular surface staining and expression of SPRR1B are mark￾edly reduced in AIRE KO mice lacking the IL-1 receptor (AIRE/IL-1R1
double knockout mice) [589] even though lymphocyte infiltration
is not attenuated. Additionally, local inhibition of IL-1 signaling at
the ocular surface in AIRE-deficient mice, by the topical application
of the IL-1 receptor antagonist, anakinra, improved tear secretion,
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 473
Table 12
Inflammatory events in the conjunctiva in patients with aqueous-deficient dry eye disease.
Event Technique Used
Flow cytometry IHC or IF* mRNA - impression
cytology
Findings compared to controls Type of dry eye disease
Metaplasia SPRR1 b SPRR1 b, SPRR2a,
SPRR2g
Increased (Li et al., 2008, Kawasaki et al., 2003,
Pflugfelder et al., 2015) SSDE
[532,737,1175]
Inflammation IL-1 a and b, IL-6,
IL-8 IL-10, TNF-a,
and TGF- b 1
Increased Pisella et al., 2000, Jones et al., 1998,
Jones et al., 1994) SSDE
[471,1176,1177]
MUC1 Decreased
IL-6 Increased (Yoon et al., 2007) SSDE [466]
IL-1b, TNF-a Increased (Zhang et al., 2016) NSDE [1178]
IL-8,, Ephrin Increased (Narayanan et al., 2006)
Moderate DED [1179]
IL-1a, IL-6,
IL-8, TNF-a and
TGF-b1
Increased (Pflugfelder et al., 1999) SSDE
[1180]
Immune Activation HLA-DR (Kawasaki et al., 2003, Jones et al.,
1994) SSDE [1175,1177]
HLA-DR þ cells CD11c þ HLA-DRþ Increased
decreased after treatment
(Epstein et al., 2013, Baudouin et al.,
2002, Baudouin et al., 2005,
Brignole et al., 2000, Brignole et al.,
2001, Sheppard et al., 2013, Pisella
et al., 2000, Tsubota et al., 1999a,
Tsubota et al., 1999b, Rolando et al.,
2005, Kunert et al., 2000) SSDE and
NSDE [471,1181e1190]
HLA-DR Increased (Versura et al., 2011) NSDE [1191]
T Cell Response CD4þCXCR3þ cells CXCL9,

10, and

11, and CXCR3
Increased (Yoon et al., 2010)
SSDE and NSDE [1192]
CD4þCCR5þ cells CCR5 Increased (Choi et al., 2012, Baudouin et al.,
2005) SSDE and NSDE [468,1190]
IFN-g, IFN-gR, IL-
13, IL-13R, MUC5AC
Increased IFN-g and IFN-g R; no
change in IL-13 and its receptor,
decreased MUC5AC
(Pflugfelder et al., 2015)
SSDE [532]
IL1b, IL-6, IL-23, IL-
17, TNF-a, IFN-g,
MMP-9, TGF-b1,
TGF-b2
Increased Chotikavanich et al., 2009, de Paiva
et al., 2009)SSDE and NSDE
[316,456]
Immune Cell Trafficking ICAM-1 (Pisella et al., 2000) SSDE [471]
(Tsubota et al., 1999b, Tsubota et al.,
1999a)
DE [1186,1187]
ICAM-1 Increased (Jones et al., 1994) SSDE [1177]
(Narayanan et al., 2006)
NSDE [1179]
MMP Production MMP-9 MMP-9 Increased (Uchino et al., 2015, Chotikavanich
et al., 2009, de Paiva et al., 2009,
Gurdal et al., 2010)
SSDE and NSDE [155,316,456,1193]
MMP-9,
Transglutamnase 2
Increased (Aragona et al., 2015) SSDE [1194]
Oxidative Stress HEL, 4NE Increased (Wakamatsu et al., 2013) SSDE
[1195]
Peroxidation
markers
Increased (Choi et al., 2016) NSDE [1196]
ROS generation
XO
Increased (Cejkova et al., 2007)
SSDE [1197]
ROS scavenging
SOD, Cat, GP
Decreased (Cejkova et al., 2008)
SSDE [1198]
ER stress GPR78, sXBP1 Increased (Coursey et al., 2016)
SSDE [1199]
Other hBD2 Increased (Narayanan et al., 2003) NSDE
[1200]
(Kawasaki et al., 2003) SSDE [1175]
hBD1, hBD3 No change
KLK7, CXCL9 Increased (Kawasaki et al., 2003) SSDE [1175]
Aquaporin 3; IFN￾gR
Decreased
Key: * ¼ biopsy or impression cytology; IHC ¼ Immunohistochemistry; IF ¼ Immunofluorescence; Cat ¼ Catalase; hBD ¼ human defensins; GP ¼ Glutathione Peroxidase;
NSDE ¼ non-Sjogren Syndrome dry eye; SSDE € ¼ Sjogren Syndrome dry eye; SOD € ¼ Superoxide Dismutase; SPRR ¼ small proline-rich proteins; XO ¼ Xanthine oxidoreductase/
xanthine oxidase; SOD; KLK7 ¼ Kallikrein 7; GPR78 ¼ 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein; sXBP1 ¼ spliced X-box-binding protein-1. See text for other abbreviations. For a
detailed list of biomarkers reported in the tears in dry eye disease, please refer to the TFOS DEWS II Tear Film report [1223].
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 474
restored ocular surface integrity and reduced keratinization [741].
However, whether these findings can be translated to the treatment
of humans remains to be shown. A recent clinical trial with a topical
IL-1 receptor antagonist for the treatment of DED was not suc￾cessful [1209].
9.2. Non-Sjogren Syndrome dry eye €
NSDE includes congenital and acquired forms of DED without
the systemic autoimmune features of Sjogren Syndrome. Condi- €
tions include age-related NSDE, congenital alacrima and familial
dysautonomia [742].
9.2.1. Intrinsic lacrimal deficiency
9.2.1.1. Lacrimal gland ablation. DED may be caused by ablation of
the lacrimal gland at any age, or by severance of the ducts during lid
surgery. DED is not an inevitable outcome, since the accessory
glands and conjunctival secretions may compensate in some cases
[743].
9.2.1.2. Congenital alacrima. Congenital alacrima or lacrimal agen￾esis may occur as an inherited disorder [744] sometimes with
agenesis of the salivary glands [745] and is a rare cause of DED in
youth or infancy. Additional associations are with blephar￾ophimosis [746], lacrimal-auriculo-dental-digital syndrome
(LADD), Pierre-Robin sequence [747] and Allgrove syndrome (see
below).
9.2.1.3. Triple A-syndrome. Triple A- or Allgrove syndrome, is a
progressive, recessively inherited disorder, in which congenital
alacrima is associated with achalasia of the cardia, Addisons dis￾ease, central neurodegeneration and autonomic dysfunction. It is
caused by mutations in the AAAS gene, encoding the protein
ALADIN [748e750].
9.2.2. Age-related Non-Sjogren Syndrome dry eye €
The most common form of NSDE is age-related ADDE and cor￾responds to the term keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) cited in the
older literature (Lemp 1995). The clinical features resemble those of
SSDE, but, in general, age of onset is later, the degree of lacrimal
gland infiltration lower, the rate of progression slower and severe
disease less common than in SSDE. Evidence for its increased fre￾quency over the lifespan is presented in the TFOS DEWS II Epide￾miology report [1226]. A steady increase in incidence of this form of
ADDE is identified from around the age of 50 years.
Aging may be defined as the accumulated changes in structure
and function that occur in a tissue or organism over its lifespan.
Such changes may contribute to but be distinct from those events
that are responsible for age-related disease [751]. According to
Rocha et al. [751] theories of aging may be usefully classified as
Programmed e involving genetic, hormonal and immunological
influences and Damage- or Errorebased, involving wear and tear,
tissue oxidation and cross-linking, post-translational modification
or the consequences of somatic mutation.
Of these factors, the role of hormones is addressed by the TFOS
DEWS II Sex, Gender, and Hormone report [1222], while, in contrast
to the situation for Sjogren syndrome, genetic susceptibility has €
received little attention. In a study of monozygotic and dizygotic
female twin pairs, Vehof et al. found a hereditability of 29% (95%
confidence interval [CI], 18%e40%) for DED symptoms and of 41%
(95% CI, 26%e56%) for DED based on a physician's diagnosis and
concurrent use of artificial tears. However this result derived from
the use of a questionnaire, which did not identify the nature of the
DED. Apart from this, there have been some small, candidate gene
studies in NSDE patients which have reported a possible role for
polymorphisms in proinflammatory cytokine genes [752], and in
killer cell Ig-like receptor and human leukocyte antigen-C genes
[753]. These results have not yet been replicated and a future search
for genetic polymorphisms in age-related NSDE will be important
to pursue.
9.2.2.1. Aging of the lacrimal gland. The potential contributions of
tissue aging to this disorder have been reviewed by Rocha et al.
[751], who point out that the reported fall in reflex Schirmer values
over the life span [754e756] could be due to a failure of any of the
elements that go to make up the lacrimal functional unit and
therefore to any one of a combination of factors such as a loss of
sensory drive from the ocular surface, a reduced delivery of secre￾tory neururotransmitters, as well as the loss of functional secretory
tissue. The Schirmer test measures the secretory response of the
lacrimal gland to increased sensory drive and information about the
influence of aging on lacrimal secretion in the absence of a sensory
input from the cornea is not available. There would be some value to
explore the effect of aging on the anesthetic Schirmer response or on
lacrimal secretion as measured by fluorophotometry, in defined
environmental conditions. Hamano et al.[757], inferred a loss of tear
volume with age, based on results from the phenol red test.
Corneal sensitivity to mechanical [389,758e760] and chemical
stimuli [389,760] falls with age, which could reduce the sensory
drive to lacrimal secretion, but an age-related fall in thermal
sensitivity (cold or hot) was not detected by Bourcier et al. [389],
using the gas esthesiometer. On the other hand, numerous papers
report that the regulated secretion of the lacrimal-derived proteins,
lysozyme, lactoferrin and peroxidase fall with age
[755,756,761e763] which would be in keeping with a loss of
lacrimal gland function.
T cell lymphocytes are among the normal immune cell popu￾lation of the human lacrimal gland (Table 1). From about the age of
40 years, the glands are increasingly infiltrated by CD4þ and CD8þ
T-cells, which are considered to be the basis of a gradual destruc￾tion of lacrimal acinar and ductal tissue. Histopathologically, a low￾grade dacryoadenitis occurs, associated with interacinar and peri￾ductal fibrosis, paraductal blood vessel loss and acinar cell atrophy
[764e766]. A marked leukocytic infiltration of the human lacrimal
gland in older individuals was also recorded by Kojima et al. [767] It
has been suggested that the acinar atrophy is secondary to duct
obstruction, much as has been proposed for MGD. It is reasonable to
suppose that infiltrating inflammatory cells, releasing cytokines
and other mediators into the gland, contribute to the lacrimal tissue
damage and that, at some point, the cumulative effects of this age￾related, structural damage determines the onset of lacrimal secre￾tory deficiency. Studies in MRL/lpr mice, a model for Sjogren syn- €
drome, suggest that pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1b,
released by lymphocytes infiltrating the lacrimal gland, can impair
the release of neurotransmitters and inhibit agonist-mediated
lacrimal gland secretion [768,769]. If this is relevant to SSDE in
the human, it may be assumed that a similar mechanism could
operate in age-related DED.
The potential role of viral infections in initiating a self-limiting
inflammatory response in the human lacrimal gland and of the
sex hormones in favouring a pro-inflammatory environment
within the gland, are dealt with elsewhere in this and other reports.
One of the proposed mechanisms of glandular damage over the
lifespan is oxidative stress, resulting from the production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide and hydrogen peroxide, in
the process of aerobic metabolism. Free radical production occurs in
the course of mitochondrial electron transfer as part of the process
of energy production. These ROS are normally removed by the
scavenging machinery of the cell, by enzymes such as superoxide
dismutase (SOD) and reducing agents such glutathione. Data from
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 475
experimental studies in mice show that increased mitochondrial
superoxide production (as seen in the conditional, Tet-mev1
transgenic mouse) [770] or decreased superoxide scavenging, (as
seen in the superoxide dismutase knockout mouse - SOD1 / ) [767]
cause lacrimal gland damage, associated with increased lipid per￾oxidation, oxidative DNA damage and inflammatory cell infiltration.
This is accompanied by reduced tear volume and increased corneal
staining, of greater severity in older animals. Intriguingly such
changes do not occur in the salivary glands in the Tet-mev1 model
[770]. It is not possible to say whether the corneal changes are a
consequence of reduced lacrimal secretion, or to the direct effect of
oxidative stress at the ocular surface, but such models suggest that
oxidative stress could play a role in age-related DED. It is relevant
that, in a comparison of human lacrimal tissue from young (17e48
year) versus old (76e87 year) cadavers, evidence of lipid peroxi￾dation and of oxidative DNA damage was found in the older group
[767]. Since activated, phagocytosing leukocytes are potent source
of ROS [771]inflammatory cells, infiltrating either the lacrimal gland
or conjunctiva, cannot be excluded as the source of this oxidative
damage [772] or, of the lipid peroxides demonstrated in the tears of
patients with age-related NSDE [773].
9.2.2.2. Aging of the conjunctiva. Giebel et al. showed an age￾related expression of apoptosis-related genes such as casp-3, Bad,
Bax and Bcl-2 in human conjunctival cells obtained by impression
cytology [774]. Zhu et al. [775], using confocal microscopy, found an
age-related decrease in structures interpreted as dendritic cells but
no difference in conjunctival in either epithelial cell or goblet cell
density. There was an increase in epithelial microcysts, which have
been mooted by some to be the product of goblet cell degeneration
[776]. Earlier, Kessing [97], using histology, had reported occlusion
of goblet cells with retention of their contents, in older people and
Abdel-Khalek et al. [777], observed the presence of hyaline bodies
in the conjunctival epithelium in 25% of subjects over the age of 79
years. Overall, such reports suggest that the conjunctiva is relatively
resistant to the of age.
9.2.2.3. The ocular surface in age-related NSDE. In age-related
NSDE, a reduction in lacrimal secretion dominates the clinical
picture and is the basis of tear hyperosmolarity. This results chiefly
from loss of secretory lacrimal tissue, but a fall in corneal sensitivity
to all sensory modalities, reported in both NSDE and SSDE may
contribute to the reduced secretion based on a lack of sensory drive
[389]. Conjunctival inflammation is a well-recognised aspect of
NSDE, of lesser degree than encountered in SSDE. Its features are
illustrated in Table 12. Marked conjunctival infiltration with CD4þ T
cells, expressing HLA-DR, has been reported [488] which likely
orchestrates inflammatory events by the release of cytokines such
as IFN-g, that can promote goblet cell loss, induce apoptosis and
stimulate keratinization of conjunctival epithelium [478] as well as
increasing the numbers of IFN-g secreting NK cells [522]. In addi￾tion, there is a decreased number of immunosuppressive T-regs and
an increase of IL-17 producing T-cells which are involved in damage
to the corneal and conjunctival epithelium. Th-1 and Th17 cells
have been shown to infiltrate the ocular surface in a mouse model
of DED [529]. Th17 cells secrete IL-17 as their signature cytokine,
capable of up-regulating MMP-3 and MMP-9 mRNA in corneal
epithelium. As has been indicated this cytokine may disrupt the
integrity of the corneal barrier.
In keeping with these events, increased levels of inflammatory
cytokines and chemokines are also detected in the tears of ADDE
patients and these are discussed in detail in the TFOS DEWS II Tear
Film report [1223]. Their likely source is the conjunctiva but an
origin from the inflamed lacrimal gland is also a possibility. Mas￾singale et al. [778], found a correlation between the concentration
of tear cytokines and severity of DED. Increased concentrations of
IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-a could amplify inflammation by recruiting
activated immune cells to the ocular surface [458].
9.2.3. Inflammatory and other infiltrations of the lacrimal glands
9.2.3.1. Sarcoidosis. Sarcoidosis is a chronic systemic disorder of
unknown origin with an estimated prevalence ranging from 1 to 40
cases per 100,000 population [779]. It is characterized by the
presence of non-caseating granulomas in multiple organs with the
lungs being involved most frequently. Other organs include the
spleen, liver, lymph nodes and skin, and the salivary and lacrimal
glands [780,781]. Patients with lacrimal gland involvement (up to
63% of the cases) typically show significant enlargement of the
gland [782]. The occurrence of DED secondary to sarcoidosis is very
common and is consequent to lacrimal gland inflammation
[782,783]. Scattered lymphocytic infiltrates are frequent, but, in
contrast to those of Sjogren syndrome, do not form foci € [784,785].
Elevated levels of circulating proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-a)
are also found [786,787].
9.2.3.2. Lymphoma. Infiltration of the lacrimal gland by lympho￾matous cells may cause DED [788].
9.2.3.3. Viral infection
9.2.3.3.1. Hepatitis C. In a study of 321 patients infected with
hepatitis C virus (HCV), sicca symptoms (eyes and/or mouth) were
noted in 10% of the cases [789]. Several studies showed that pa￾tients with chronic HCV infection present extrahepatic manifesta￾tions that may mimic the clinical, immunologic and histologic
manifestation of primary Sjogren syndrome € [790] and in a study of
1020 HCV patients, nearly half the cases (47.5%) had Sjogren syn- €
drome [791].
9.2.3.3.2. HIV e AIDS. DED is also a common finding in patients
infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) with its prev￾alence estimated at 38.8% [34,792,793]. In AIDS-related DED, unlike
the situation in SSDE, there is an infiltration of the lacrimal gland
with predominantly CD8þ suppressor cells, rather than CD4þ,
helper cells [794].
9.2.3.4. Radiation injury. DED may be a complication of radio￾therapy for benign and malignant conditions of the orbit [795], or
of the head and neck, if the periorbital area is included within the
treatment field. Several human studies have reported that the
development of DED is dose-dependent [345,795e798]. In sum￾mary, published data suggest that doses >57 Gy are predictive of
certain DED whereas those <30 Gy are less likely to cause it [795].
Onset of DED symptoms is delayed after exposure, from 4 to
11 years at doses <30 Gy, or between 9 and 10 months after
treatment at high doses [795].
The most frequent ophthalmic findings in response to radiation
exposure in humans are external eye disorders [799]. As shown in
studies of children after the Chernobyl disaster, these findings
include decreased lacrimation, and acute and chronic blephar￾oconjunctivitis [799]. Those children who lived closest to the source
of radiation had the greatest degree of aqueous tear deficiency.
In animal studies, there are fewer reports of the effects of ra￾diation on the lacrimal gland than on the salivary gland [800e803].
One study reported the effect of a single dose of radiation (15 Gy)
on rabbit lacrimal glands, 3 and 30 days post treatment [801]. In
three other studies the effects of single doses of radiation,
2.5e20 Gy, on the lacrimal gland and other ocular adnexa, were
studied in monkeys [802], 24e48 h [802,803] or up to 112 days
[800] post-treatment. A common finding in all these studies was
the rapid (24 h) apoptotic loss of acinar and myoepithelial cells. In
contrast, ductal cells were either unaffected, at low dose, or were
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 476
dilated at higher doses and at later time points. Also, at 24 h
following radiation treatment, the tissue was infiltrated with neu￾trophils, which were gradually replaced by mononuclear cells and
macrophages. Other reported changes were secretory retention in
acini, vacuole formation, extracellular edema and thickening of the
basement membrane. One study showed redistribution of the
tenascin-C matrix. The severity of the lacrimal gland lesions was
dose-related and diminished with time, but the tissues did not
recover completely in the longer term. The authors hypothesized
that this is probably due to the death of the acinar progenitor or
stem cells.
One finding from the study by Stephens et al. [802], was that ra￾diation treatment (24e48 h) did not affect other ocular adnexae,
namely the meibomian glands and conjunctival goblet cells. The
authors hypothesized that “acute loss of lacrimal gland serous acini
and the resulting reduction of tears is alone sufficient to cause DED
and could predispose to the development of secondary changes in the
other glands of the eyelids”. This hypothesis needs to be tested to
establish if this animal model could be a quantifiable model for ADDE.
9.2.4. Lacrimal gland obstruction
9.2.4.1. Cicatricial conjunctivitis. DED can be a serious outcome in
those diseases causing extensive conjunctival scarring, such as
chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), Syndrome (SJS)/toxic
epidermal necrosis (TEN), mucous membrane pemphigoid and
trachoma and also after physical and chemical injury. The DED is of
mixed phenotype, due to the combined involvement of the lacrimal
and meibomian glands and to ocular surface changes affecting its
wettability and secretory capacity. Tear distribution may also be
affected. As a consequence, clinical severity is often high and ocular
surface inflammation due to DED is compounded by inflammatory
events that are part of the primary disorder. At their worst, such
conditions may lead to corneal opacification, perforation and
blindness. In one UK report of cicatrizing conjunctivitis, OcMMP
accounted for 61% of new cases in a single year, SJS/TEN for 20% and
other causes for 20% [804]. Some causes of cicatricial conjunctivitis
are discussed below.
9.2.4.2. Ocular graft-versus-host disease
9.2.4.2.1. Introduction. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT) is an effective treatment for hematological
malignancies. However, success is hampered by chronic GVHD
(cGVHD), which can cause death or significant morbidity with a
severely diminished quality of life [805]. DED is a major late
complication [806e810] and has attracted worldwide attention
[806,811e814]. Ocular cGVHD occurs in 40e80% of recipients and
presents several months after the date of HSCT. The associated DED
is an immune-mediated, inflammatory disorder [489,815].
Reported risk factors for cGVHD include: the presence of pe￾ripheral blood mononuclear cells among stem cell sources [816],
female to male transplantion [817,818], Epstein-Barr virus in the
donor, and previous, acute skin GVHD [818], repeated allo-HSCTs
and diabetes mellitus. The occurrence of cGVHD in multiple or￾gans may amplify the severity of ocular GVHD [819].
Chronic GVHD is considered to be a later phase of the acute
GVHD reaction, due to host tissue recognition (allo-recognition) by
donor T cells, but there may also be an autoimmune element.
Accelerated, immune-mediated fibrosis leads to functional changes
in the lacrimal gland, cornea, conjunctiva and lid, as well as in
additional organs. The main histologic feature of cGVHD-related
DED is widespread tissue atrophy and fibrosis, with lymphocytic
infiltration. Immune-mediated fibrosis leads to both lacrimal gland
duct obstruction [815,820e824] and obstruction of the meibomian
gland ducts [825]. Donor-derived fibroblasts may be involved in
this process [815,822] and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT)
[821].
As mentioned earlier, EMT is a process whereby epithelial cells
are converted into multipotent mesenchymal stem cells that can
differentitate into a variety of cell types. In cGVHD-related DED,
cross-reactions between the donor and recipient immune cells
generates a “cytokine storm”, which compromises the mucosal
barriers on the ocular surface and may trigger EMT at various sites.
In the lacrimal gland, under the influence of local T cells, EMT
affecting myoepithelial cells is considered to cause severe fibrosis,
resulting in gland loss and lacrimal duct obstruction [821]. EMT in
the conjunctival epithelium may disturb wettability by affecting
microvilli and the expression of glycocalyx mucins [826]. The ocular
features of GVHD are complex and involve an interaction between
the lacrimal and meibomian glands and the ocular surface. Mani￾festations observed using OCT, include abnormal meibomian gland
orifices, conjunctival keratinization and chemosis, and corneal
epithelial opacification, thinning and sloughing [827].
9.2.4.2.2. Involvement of the lacrimal gland. Various events lead
to lacrimal gland inflammation and tissue damage in cGVHD.
Activated CD4þ and CD8þ T cells, present mainly in periductal areas,
colocalise with the full complement of surface molecules necessary
for antigen presentation, viz. periductal fibroblasts expressing
CD34þ and HLA-DR and adhesion molecules such as CD54þ, and
costimulatory molecules such as CD40þ, CD80þ, and CD86þ (Fig. 11)
[823,828]. Macrophages within affected glands in cGVHD have
been incriminated as a source of cytokines and chemokines and of
increased of oxidative stress, contributing to the cicatirizing
lacrimal gland disease.
The tissue renin-angiotensin system (RAS) present in the
lacrimal gland may contribute to lacrimal gland inflammation in
cGVHD [820]. In a murine model, the frequency of CD45þ inflam￾matory cells and HSP47þ fibroblasts and the expression of fibro￾genic molecules, increases in the cGVHD-affected lacrimal gland
and is decreased by an AT1R antagonist [829], suggesting that tis￾sue RAS is linked to the inflammatory and fibrotic cascade.
9.2.4.2.3. Involvement of meibomian gland. Periglandular mei￾bomian gland changes have been observed in GVHD using confocal
microscopy and infrared meibography. Inflammatory cell infiltra￾tion, fibrosis and obstruction of meibomian ducts have been re￾ported which are more diffuse than those reported in MGD [825].
Early detection and monitoring of ocular GVHD changes will be
feasible using this technique [830].
9.2.4.2.4. Conjunctival involvement. The conjunctiva is a recog￾nised target in ocular cGVHD [821,831] and inflammatory cell
infiltration together with conjunctival keratinization [824] and
scarring are significant features [832], accompanied by local
elevation of CXCL9 and CXCL10 chemokines and their C-X-C motif
receptor 3 in GVHD-related DED [833].
9.2.4.2.5. Corneal involvement. Jabs et al. reported that corneal
epithelial thinning and keratinization were the major features of
GVHD [824]. Keratinization of the conjunctiva and cornea were
attributed either to a primary manifestation of the GVHD or as
secondary to the DED state, but it was also suggested that corneal
epithelial thinning might be related to chemotherapy preceding
transplantation. The GVHD cornea may show severe epithelial
damage and the occurrence of early tear film breakup may add to
the visual disability. Corneal perforation may occur occasionally
and CD8þ T cells [834] and macrophages have been shown to
infiltrate the perforation margin. MMPs, such as MMP-2 and MMP-
9, have also been detected and are assumed to be responsible for
tissue loss [835].
9.2.4.2.6. Findings in the tears. Changes in the tears in GVHD
either reflect or contribute to inflammation at the ocular surface.
Tear turnover is reduced and the tear film lipid layer, observed by
DR-1 interferometry, can be severely disturbed [836]. In one study,
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 477
tear osmolarity was raised (314.0 ± 22.1 mOsm/L) and inversely
correlated with the TBUT and Schirmer test results [837]. INF-g is
reported to be elevated in the tears in the early phase of ocular
GVHD and IL-6 in a later phase [838] while another study showed
that IL-6, IL-10, and TNF-a elevation are strongly correlated with
ocular findings [839]. In another study, soluble TNF receptor 1
expression was upregulated [840]. Tibrewal et al. [245], reported an
increase in eDNA and NET formation in GVHD in common with
other forms of DED.
9.2.4.2.7. Preclinical models of ocular GVHD. The pathophysi￾ology of cGVHD has been studied in a number of animal models
[489,815,841,842]. Herretes et al. [489] developed a mouse model
of ocular GVHD in which donor T cells were recruited to the eyes of
the recipients of MHC-matched, allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplants. In this model, MHC-matched (H2b) C3H.SW mice were
lethally irradiated and several hours later received donor B6 BMCs
replete with B6 T cells. Several weeks post HSCT, animals receiving
donor T cells lost weight and began to exhibit clinical signs of
murine GVHD including ruffled fur, hunching, and diarrhea.
Approximately 3e4 weeks following transplantation, increased
fluorescein staining was observed in the corneas of recipient mice,
which progressed to corneal ulceration by about 6 weeks. There
was a difference in the tempo of induction of systemic and ocular
GVHD. In another model, using an MHC-matched, minor histo￾compatibility mismatched, HSCT, donor fibroblasts derived from
mesenchymal stem or stromal cells were shown to contribute to
the pathogenesis of immune-mediated fibrosis [815]. Such models
offer an opportunity to explore the underlying mechanisms of
ocular GVHD.
9.2.4.3. Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrosis.
SJS/TEN is a life-threatening, dermatobullous disease that affects
the skin and mucous membranes, including the cornea and con￾junctiva [843]. Other targets include respiratory, gastrointestinal,
hepatic, oral, otorhinolaryngologic, renal and genitourinary sys￾tems [844]. The condition involves widespread keratinocyte death
and epidermal necrosis, leading to splitting of sub-epithelial layers
and epithelial detachment at skin sites and mucosal surfaces.
Diagnostically, SJS is distinguished from TEN by skin detachment
affecting less than 10% of the body surface compared to a loss of
over 30% in TEN. An overlap SJS/TEN syndrome is defined by a loss
of 10e30% of skin [845]. SJS affects children and adolescents
whereas TEN may occur at any age. The estimated incidence of SJS is
approximately 0.4e7 cases per million.
SJS/TEN must be distinguished from another bullous skin dis￾order, erythema multiforme, which runs a shorter course with
limited mucosal involvement. It is triggered by infection, usually
HSV, as opposed to drugs and other chemical and physical factors,
which is more characteristic of SJS/TEN [846].
Antibiotics [847] are a common cause of SJS, in addition to an￾algesics, cough and cold medications, NSAIDS and anti-epileptics
[848] and drugs used in the treatment of gout [849e851]. Doxy￾cycline- and acetazolamide-sensitive cases have also been reported
[852,853]. The use of antiretroviral treatment for HIV infection has
been a cause of SJS in sub-Saharan Africa [854,855]. Other etiologies
include physical agents such as sun exposure and radiation therapy
[846]. It may also be idiopathic.
The occurrence of SJS/TEN shows a genetic susceptibility, which
is related to ethnic group and may show drug specificity. HLA￾B*1502 is associated with carbamazepine-induced SJS in people
of Han Chinese descent [856] and IKZF1 has been identified as a
susceptibility gene for cold medicine-related SJS/TEN with severe
mucosal involvement, in Japan, Korea, Brasil and India [850]. HLA￾A*02:06 and HLA-B*44:03C appear to increase the risk of severe
mucosal involvement in the Japanese.
Kinoshita and colleagues have proposed that susceptibility to
the ocular complications of SJS/TEN is related to an imbalance of
mechanisms controlling innate immunity at the ocular surface. This
may determine colonization of the ocular surface by bacteria such
as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) or Staphylo￾coccus epidermidis (MRSE) after the onset of disease, or be
responsible for severe ocular manifestations in TEN [857,858]. Ueta
et al. [857], reported a significant role for interactions of HLA-A and
the Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) gene in the onset of ocular compli￾cations and in addition, an interaction between TLR3 and prosta￾glandin E receptor 3 (PTGER3) [859]. These authors [859] have also
reported gene polymorphisms that influence innate immunity.
Sotozono et al. [858], emphasized the importance of NSAIDS and
cold medicines in the etiology of SJS/TEN.
Acute SJS/TEN is generally considered to be a T-cell mediated
type IV hypersensitivity disorder and there is strong support for the
role of cytotoxic T cells in its pathogenesis [846]. In the early stages
of TEN, CD8þ lymphocytes predominate in the blister fluid and
epidermis, many expressing surface markers normally found on NK
cells, while CD4þ lymphocytes are localized to the dermal layers
[860]. Later, there is an increase in activated monocytes. Keratino￾cyte cell death occurs by apoptosis [846,861] either by a FAS/FAS￾ligand process or by the delivery of granzyme B to target cells by
activated T cells, through perforin-induced channels. Either
mechanism activates the intracellular caspase cascade, leading to
apoptotic cell death [862].
The acute stage of the ocular disease is characterized by the
onset of a membranous keratoconjunctivitis. In the chronic stage of
the disease, most patients have conjunctival inflammation, sym￾blepharon, entropion, trichiasis, limbal stem cell deficiency and
corneal conunctivalization and neovasculization [863]. There is a
close relationship between corneal epithelial stem cell loss and the
degree of visual impairment [864].
Various changes have been recorded in the tears of patients with
SJS/TEN and IL-17 is elevated, as in other cicatrizing forms of severe
DED [865]. A fall in level of two lacrimal-derived proteins, lacto￾ferrin and epidermal growth factor (EGF), is thought to contribute
to ocular surface damage [866]. MMP-8, MMP-9 and MPO
were elevated in SJS and the MMP to tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase ratio was high, suggesting a potential contribu￾tion to corneal melting [149b].
DED is often of extreme severity in SJS/TEN, with a total absence
of tear production. In this case the relapsing inflammation induces
squamous metaplasia and keratinization of the entire conjunctival
epithelium, with decreased goblet cell density [867]. This is asso￾ciated with epithelial hyperproliferation and expression of trans￾glutaminase I [868e870], and filaggrin [871].
9.2.4.4. Mucous membrane pemphigoid and ocular cicatricial pem￾phigoid. Mucous membrane pemphigoid is a chronic progressive
autoimmune, blistering disease, affecting mucous membranes at
multiple sites and occasionally the skin. It affects women more than
men (F:M 2:1) [872] and usually presents in the later decades of life
( 60 years) although it may occur as early as the first decade.
Mucous membrane pemphigoid most frequently involves the
oral mucosa (85% of patients) and conjunctiva (65%), and less, the
nasal mucosa (20e40%), skin (25e30%), anogenital area/or pharynx
(20%), larynx (5e15%), and esophagus (5e15%) [873e875].
Conjunctival involvement is referred to as OCP. Episodes of
inflammation and epithelial separation are followed by fibrosis,
which may cause life-threatening strictures in the larynx or
esophagus or, in the case of the eye, may lead to blindness. Severity,
and the number of mucosal sites affected, varies, and the oral form
may occur in isolation. In a UK survey, ocular mucous membrane
pemphigoid (implying OCP) accounted for 61% of newly diagnosed
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 478
cases of cictatricial conjunctivitis, with an estimated incidence of
0.8 per million population [804]. An incidence of 1.3e2.0 was re￾ported in France and Germany [876,877].
Genetic susceptibility for OCP is suggested by associations with
HLA B12, HLA A3, HLA-DR4, and HLA-DQB1*0301 [878,879]. Also,
associations with rheumatoid arthritis [880] and Wegener's gran￾ulomatosis [881] have been reported. The disease may be triggered
or exacerbated by surgery [882] and MMP is occasionally reported
as a reaction to drug exposure.
The pathogenesis of MMP involves a loss of immune tolerance to
components of the epithelial basal lamina and an antibody￾induced, complement-mediated reaction, leading to epithelial
detachment [873]. Epithelial separation may result from the cyto￾toxic effects of inflammatory mediators or from the release of
lysosomal proteases [883]. TGF-b may play a role in the scarring
process [884].
Serum autoantibodies have been detected against: bullous
pemphigoid antigens (BPAg) 1 and 2. Integrin subunits a6/b4,
laminin-5, laminin-6, and collagen type I. BPAg2 and a 6/b 4
integrins are transmembrane proteins linked by laminin 5 to the
epithelial anchoring fibrils, composed of type VII collagen. These
elements are important to epithelial attachment. Diagnosis of
mucous membrane pemphigoid or OCP is based on the clinical
picture and the demonstration, by direct immunofluorescence
microscopy, of linear deposits of IgG and/or IgA and/or C3 in the
basal lamina, in a perilesional biopsy.
The presence of CD4þ T cells and B cells within conjunctival
infiltrates suggests the involvement of cellular immunity in OCP
[884,885,886], with Th17 lymphocytes playing a prominent role
[887]. Langerhans cells expressing costimulatory molecules for T￾cell activation (CD86þ) have been demonstrated [888] and con￾nective tissue mast cells are regarded as key players in the fibrotic
process [890]. CD14þ cells among CD45þ cells are also found in OCP
conjunctiva [891].
Additionally, increased expression of macrophage-colony stim￾ulating factor, collagen binding heat shock protein 47, TGF-b1and
IL-4 are considered to enhance both conjunctival inflammation and
scarring in OCP [892e895]. In keeping with other ocular surface
inflammatory disorders an increase in levels of MMP-8, MMP-9,
MPO has been demonstrated in the tears of OCP patients
[149b,896], together with IL-8 [896].
The clinical features of OCP include a progressive subepithelial
fibrosis, fornix foreshortening, symblepharon, ankyloblepharon,
meibomian duct obstruction and DED. Additionally, entropion,
trichiasis, and corneal neovascularization and scarring occur. The
conjunctival fibrosis resembles that seen in cGVHD and SJS/TEN. It
may be staged as: stage I - subepithelial fibrosis, stage II - fornix
foreshortening, stage III - symblepharon- and, stage IV - ankylo￾blepharon and surface keratinization [897].
As in other affected mucosae, the initiating cause of OCP is a
separation of the epithelium from the underlying stroma followed
by subepithelial fibrosis [898]. Its clinical evolution is slow and
diagnosis is delayed compared to that of SJS/TEN, with a median of
225 days elapsing from symptom onset, compared to 7 days for SJS/
TEN [804]. Severity may be asymmetrical between the two eyes but
the disease usually progresses to involve the palpebral and bulbar
conjunctiva bilaterally [899]. The onset of DED is relatively late in
the disease. As in other forms of cicatricial conjunctivitis, contrib￾uting factors include obstruction of lacrimal gland and meibomian
gland ducts, conjunctival goblet cell loss [435], altered expression
of epithelial glycocalyx mucins, epithelial keratinization and
impaired tear film spreading.
9.2.4.5. Pemphigus. Pemphigus is a potentially fatal autoimmune
blistering disease of the skin and mucous membranes, with an
incidence of 0.1e0.5 patients per 100,000 population per year. It is
rare in childhood [900]. It is due to the formation of pathogenic
autoantibodies directed against desmosomal proteins concerned in
intercellular adhesion. Pemphigus vulgaris (PV), the most common
variant, is characterized by circulating IgG antibodies against des￾moglein 3 (Dsg3) and, in about half the patients, Dsg1 [901,902].
The characteristic ocular finding in PV is conjunctivitis with
hyperemia and mucoid discharge [900]. Conjunctival blisters, ero￾sions, and symblepharon are rare, although conjunctival biopsies
may demonstrate similar histopathologic and direct immunofluo￾rescence findings to skin biopsies [903]. Although the ocular
manifestations of pemphigus vulgaris may precede oral or skin
lesions by several days to months, eye sequelae are generally milder
than in OCP and the symptoms usually improve with the institution
of systemic therapy. It may be that the selfelimiting nature of the
ocular changes in pemphigus, compared to OCP, relates to the
absence of involvement of the basal lamina [1210].
9.2.4.6. Trachoma. Trachoma is a chronic, scarring keratoconjunc￾tivitis initiated by recurrent infections with Chlamydia trachomatis
in childhood. The scarring complications, which are a cause of
blindness on a global scale, usually occur in adulthood and include
corneal opacity resulting from tarsal and conjunctival scarring,
limbal stem cell deficiency, and trichiasis. DED is part of the overall
picture, resulting from lacrimal gland duct obstruction, goblet cell
loss, a cicatrizing meibomian gland obstruction and lid malap￾position [904]. In chronic disease, lid thickening is due to a fibrous
subepithelial sheet adherent to the tarsal plate [905] whose
quantification by in vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM) correlates
well with histological findings [906]. A variable degree of meibo￾mian gland atrophy was reported by Al-Rajhi [905]. No systematic
study of the evolution of cicatricial lacrimal or meibomian gland
changes appears to have been conducted.
9.2.4.7. Chemical injury. Accidental or deliberate chemical injury to
the eyes, e.g., by exposure to acids and alkalis, are a major source of
chronic, symptomatic, ocular disability including sight loss which
may amount to blindness. It is the basis of considerable personal
tragedy. When extensive, the effects of inflammation and tissue
destruction may be compounded by DED, due to meibomian gland
and ocular surface damage and obstruction of lacrimal secretion. Its
numerical importance is indicated by a population-based study
conducted in the United States, over a 2 year period, which recor￾ded a mean of 15,865 new chemical burn cases per year, resulting in
an incidence rate of 51.10 new cases per million per year [907].
Projecting this figure globally, a minimum of 357,710, burn acci￾dents were predicted to occur per year, worldwide.
This is a major topic in its own right and will not be addressed in
any detail by this Subcommittee other than to direct the reader to
several excellent reviews of pathophysiology, classification and the
influence of topographical extent and severity on prognosis
[908e912]. Current approaches rely in particular on an assessment
of the extent of limbal injury and the extent and depth of corneal
injury [910,911]. Gupta et al. concluded that the subdivision of
grade IV injury into a further 3 subdivisions, by Dua [910], was of
predictive value compared to the Roper-Hall method [912].
Although there is general recognition that the DED following
extensive chemical injury contributes to the poor prognosis, there
has been little formal examination of its contribution [913]. The
subject would benefit from a longitudinal, multicenter study.
9.3. Hyposecretory states due to failure of the lacrimal functional
unit
This section deals with DED due to lacrimal hyposecretion as
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 479
opposed to that due to organic disease of the lacrimal gland. In the
healthy eye, lacrimal secretion is under the control of the LFU with
additional input from higher centres. Secretory output is therefore
dependent on the integrity of the afferent and efferent limbs of the
reflex arc. The influence of such reflex failure on conjunctival and
meibomian secretion is uncertain. The contribution of LFU failure to
DED is considered below.
9.3.1. Reflex afferent block
Tear production is under neural regulation and an alteration in
the trigeminal inputs from the cornea can cause DED by blocking
lacrimal protein, electrolyte and water secretion [13]. Corneal nerve
terminals also exert a number of trophic functions, which support
epithelial cell proliferation and/or migration [914e916] and
possibly immune regulation. A loss of sensory drive can come about
in several ways.
9.3.1.1. Topical anesthetic use. Bilateral topical proparacaine de￾creases blink rate by about 30% and tear secretion by 60e75% due to
a lack of trigeminal, sensorineural stimulation [217]. The chronic
use and abuse of topical anesthetics can induce permanent damage
to the cornea leading to corneal opacity, melting and perforation
[917]. It is assumed that DED contributes to these changes, due at
least to the lack of tears and to reduced blinking, but additional
factors are likely to be a loss of trophic nerve functions and direct
toxicity.
9.3.1.2. Trigeminal nerve injury. Damage to the trigeminal nerve,
through surgical or accidental injury may occur anywhere along its
course, from the trigeminal nucleus, root or ganglion, its
ophthalmic branch, and at the ocular surface. The severity of its
effects on the eye, depend on the extent of the damage.
9.3.1.3. Refractive surgery. Complications due to a disruption of
corneal sensory innervation are a feature of refractive surgery, such
as photorefractive keratoplasty (PRK) and laser in situ keratomil￾eusis (LASIK) [918], in part the result of reduced tear secretion
[259,919], a fall in blink rate [259,920], loss of trophic support [921]
and changes in tear composition and stability [922]. The clinical
syndrome of pain, and of punctate keratitis on the flap has been
called in the past, LASIK DED, and is still referred to as such. It oc￾curs in up to 60% of patients in the first month after surgery,
declining in severity over 6e12 months postoperatively [923,924].
Tear hyperosmolarity has been recorded by one observer [925].
Punctate keratitis on the flap, but sparing the region of the hinge,
has supported a causal role for sensory denervation and neuro￾pathic firing from damaged sensory endings e termed LASIK￾Induced-Neuro-Epitheliopathy, or LINE, by Wilson [926]. Also, it
is suggested, that NGF and other neuropeptides such as substance P
or CGRP may be key factors in the syndrome [918]. The two etiol￾ogies are not mutually exclusive and it is likely that LASIK DED and
LINE can occur together, in which case a clue to the presence of DED
is punctate epitheliopathy in that it affects both the LASIK flap and
the cornea/conjunctiva outside it, in a distribution typical of DED.
Further information is contained in the TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic
Dry Eye, and the Pain and Sensation reports [1224, 1227].
9.3.1.4. Neurotrophic keratitis. Neurotrophic keratitis (NK) is a rare
disease of the cornea caused by impairment of corneal sensory
innervation. The disease is characterized by decreased or absent
corneal sensitivity combined with more extensive anesthesia of the
globe and including at least the upper lid and nasal mucosa. Neu￾rotrophic keratitis ranges in severity from punctate epithelial
keratitis, corneal opacity with superficial neovascularization, se￾vere inflammation and epithelial loss, persistent epithelial defect,
and intractable corneal ulceration, which may proceed to perfora￾tion [927]. Because the eye is insensitive, diagnosis may be delayed.
Although numerous ocular and systemic diseases may cause neu￾rotrophic keratitis, the most common cause is viral infection,
particularly, herpes zoster keratoconjunctivitis and rarely, herpes
simplex keratitis. It may also be caused by nerve compression.
Nowadays it is a less common outcome following surgical inter￾vention for trigeminal neuralgia.
When the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve is
affected by herpes zoster, affection of the nasociliary branch of the
ophthalmic nerve, heralded by a zosteriform rash at the root of the
nose, is recognised as a risk factor for Herpes Zoster Ophthalmicus
(HZO) [928]. DED is an important feature. In a study of neurotrophic
keratitis due to HZO, sensory loss affected the cornea, upper lid and
brow on the affected side and also the nasal mucosa, as indicated by
a loss of the nasolacrimal reflex [255]. A diffuse punctate keratitis
and a marked fall in reflex tear production occurred, the latter
attributed to a loss of secretomotor drive from both the ipsilateral
cornea and nasal mucosa. A lesser fall in reflex tearing on the
contralateral side and a lesser degree of corneal staining, was
postulated to be due to a reduction in blink rate and to an effect of
cross-innervation on tear production in the fellow eye [255]. It is
relevant that, in those patients with HZO without neurotrophic
keratitis the nasolacrimal reflex was intact.
A loss of trophic support is considered to be a feature of neu￾rotrophic keratitis. Such trophic factors, which promote epithelial
proliferation and differentiation and corneal healing [929] are
expressed by the corneal nerves and in the epithelium and include
Nerve Growth Factor (NGF), SP, CGRP, NPY and Insulin-like Growth
Factor (IGF-1). They are discussed further in the TFOS DEWS II Pain
and Sensation report [1224].
Clinically IGF-1 combined with a SP-derived peptide, has shown
promise in the treatment of neurotrophic keratitis [930] and in
another preliminary study, topical application of murine NGF was
effective in healing the cornea and restoring corneal sensitivity in
12 patients with neurotrophic keratitis [931]. This was later
confirmed in a larger group of patients with moderate to severe
neurotrophic keratitis [932]. A clinical trial of a new human re￾combinant NGF (hrNGF) eye drop is now active in patients with
moderate to severe neurotrophic keratitis both in Europe and in the
USA.
9.3.1.5. Contact lens wear. Contact lens wearers may experience
ocular discomfort, frequently interpreted as dryness, as well as
variable degree of decreased corneal sensation. The subject is
reviewed in the TFOS Workshop on Contact Lens Discomfort [933]
and further comment will be found in the report of the TFOS DEWS
II Iatrogenic Dry Eye report.
9.3.2. Secretomotor blockade
9.3.2.1. Parasympathetic damage. Damage to the parasympathetic
innervation of the lacrimal gland may follow injury to the nervus
intermedius during surgery for vestibular schwannomas in the
cerebellopontine angle. An associated lagophthalmos due to injury
of the seventh cranial nerve may compound the resulting DED
[934]. DED has also been reported as a consequence of schwan￾nomas affecting the greater superficial petrosal nerve or injury to
the nerve at the time of their removal [935,936].
9.3.2.2. Pharmacological inhibition of lacrimal secretion. A large
number of systemic medications have been reported as risk factors
for DED, including antidepressants, anticholinergics, antipsy￾chotics, antispasmotics and antihistamines as well as chemother￾apeutics, antihypertensive, anti-arrhythmics, antithyroid agents,
opioid analgesics [937,938]. These drugs are used to treat common
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 480
conditions in the elderly such as depression, Parkinson's disease
and arthritis. Approximately 76% of Americans 60 years or older
used two or more prescription drugs and 37% used five or more,
between 2007 and 2008 [939]. Another study also showed that
patients using decongestants, antihistamines, and vitamins have a
higher incidence of DED [940]. In addition it may be assumed that
reporting the prevalence of DED in clinical trials may be
underestimated.
A full account of iatrogenic DED is provided in the TFOS DEWS II
Iatrogenic Dry Eye report [1227].
9.3.2.3. Combined afferent and efferent blockade
9.3.2.3.1. Familial dysautonomia. Familial dysautonomia (Riley
Day syndrome), is an autosomal recessive disorder due to muta￾tions in a gene encoding an IkB kinase-associated protein [941].
Lacrimal dysfunction, DED and corneal damage are major features
of the disorder, in which a generalized insensitivity to pain, present
from birth, is accompanied by a marked lack of both emotional and
reflex tearing. There is a progressive defect in the cervical sympa￾thetic and parasympathetic innervation of the lacrimal gland and of
the sensory innervation of the ocular surface, affecting both small
myelinated (Ad) and unmyelinated (C) trigeminal neurons.
9.4. Other disorders
9.4.1. Meige syndrome: blepharospasm and dry eye
Essential blepharospasm is a disease characterized by sponta￾neous, excessive, intermittent or constant, contraction of the peri￾orbital muscles, mainly of orbicularis oculi, occurring without other
neurological or ophthalmological cause [942]. In Meige syndrome
the spasm extends to include other facial muscle, the tongue, the
pharynx and the cervical muscles. The cause for the blepharospasm
is not known but it may sometimes be drug-induced or associated
with brain disease. There are several reports which indicate some
relationship between blepharospasm and DED [943,944]. Also it is
reported that 57% of DED resistant to treatment is associated with
Meige syndrome [945]. In the past, oral psychotropic drugs or
orbicular muscle resection have been applied effectively
[942,946e948], but in recent years, local injection of Botulinum
toxin is considered to be the most effective treatment
[944,947,949].
9.4.2. Diabetes mellitus
Patients with diabetes complain of DED symptoms. There is
evidence that tear film parameters are altered in patients with
diabetes, with a reduction in tear breakup time and tear secretion
[950]. DED signs and symptoms have also been found to correlate
with degree of peripheral neuropathy and severity of diabetic
retinopathy [951a]. Factors thought to contribute to reduced tear
production in diabetes include microvascular damage to the
lacrimal gland from hyperglycemia, reduced lacrimal innervation
from autonomic neuropathy, reduction in trophic support to
lacrimal tissue, and reduced reflex tearing due to impairment of
corneal sensitivity [951b]. Reduction in tear film stability and TBUT
is likely to be due to reduced mucin production by goblet cells.
Goblet cell density is thought to be dependent on corneal inner￾vation, and reductions in corneal innervation have been observed
to reduce goblet cell function [952]. This is also implicated in post￾LASIK DED [918]. (See also TFOS DEWS II Sex, Gender and Hormones
report [1222]).
9.4.3. Pseudoexfoliation
Pseudoexfoliation (PEX) is a basal lamina disorder encountered
increasingly with age, characterized by the accumulation of clumps
of micro-fibrils on the surface of the lens capsule, ciliary body, iris,
trabecular meshwork and conjunctiva [953,954]. In PEX patients,
both Schirmer test and tear film breakup time were significantly
lower compared to a control group [955]. The number of goblet
cells per unit area of conjunctiva was no different than in controls,
but on electron microscopy, typical pseudoexfoliation filaments
were found in the stroma in PEX patients along with remarkable
changes in mucin packaging and goblet cell morphology [956].
10. Evaporative dry eye
10.1. Introduction
As noted, all forms of DED are evaporative in the sense that tear
and ocular surface hyperosmolarity can only arise in response to
evaporation. Hyper-evaporative loss implies that the rate of evap￾orative loss per unit area of the ocular surface is above the normal
range, measured in an individual blinking spontaneously in stan￾dard room conditions that do not impose DES.
According to the TFOS DEWS report [1], EDE comes about as a
result of a loss of evaporative barrier function of the tears or due to
reduced ocular surface wettability. This has led to a sub￾classification into lid-related EDE and ocular surfaceerelated DED.
The latter form of EDE represents a distinct entry point into the
vicious circle whereby tear instability, leading to tear film breakup
in the interblink interval (and an OPI <1), is the initiator of tear
hyperosmolarity. The existence of hybrid forms of DED, which
include an evaporative component, is discussed elsewhere in the
report and is summarised in Table 13.
10.2. Lid-related evaporative dry eye (intrinsic EDE)
10.2.1. Age-related meibomian gland changes
There is general agreement that meibomian gland acini are lost
with increasing age. Arita studied meibomian gland loss by non￾contact infra-red meibography in 236 healthy volunteers between
the ages of between 4 and 98 years [957]. Gland dropout was
expressed as a combined meiboscore for the upper and lower lids of
one eye. There were few meibomian gland changes in either males
Table 13
Hybrid subtypes of dry eye disease.
Subtype Example
Organic ADDE due to lacrimal gland
pathology, combined with an
organic, MGD-dependent EDE
In Sjogren syndrome €
A combination of an organic ADDE,
MGD-dependent EDE and EDE
secondary to ocular surface
disease.
GVHD or to varying degrees, other
forms of cicatrizing conjunctivitis.
There is obstruction to the lacrimal
gland ducts, cicatrizing MGD and ocular
surface disease secondary to the
primary systemic disease.
Organic ADDE with a functional EDE In severe ADDE there is defective
spreading of the TFLL and a predicted
functional EDE
Organic EDE with a functional ADDE. When DED is severe, there is a fall in
corneal sensitivity. It is predicted that,
in EDE, this leads to a loss of
compensatory, sensory drive to the
lacrimal gland, and a functional
aqueous-deficient state.
ADDE evolving to EDE When tear break up occurs within the
blink interval, the cornea is subjected to
excessive evaporation at the site of the
breakup. Thus any ADDE of sufficient
severity is predicted to be converted to
an EDE. Tear proteins of lacrimal origin
should be at a normal level.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 481
or females younger than 20 years, after which there was a signifi-
cant dropout with age, without a statistical difference between the
sexes. Den et al. [958], reported that the meibomian gland dropout
score became positive after 40 years of age and a similar observa￾tion was made by Mathers et al. [763], who observed in addition, an
alteration in the expressibility of meibum in keeping with
obstructive MGD.
Villani et al. [390], using OCT, showed an age-related decrease in
number of acini and acinar diameter with age, together with
increased secretion reflectivity and acinar wall changes, in a study
of 100 asymptomatic subjects aged 20e83 years. Changes were
similar in men and women and were not accompanied by changes
in orifice size. They were most marked at 50 and 60 years of age,
contrasting with the findings of Arita et al. [959], who observed
dropout by meibography from the age of 20 years. Histo￾pathological studies by Obata et al. [624], support the occurrence
of acinar atrophy without acinar dilatation, distinct from the
outcome of obstructive disease.
Such studies suggest that the loss of meibomian acini with age
may on the one hand be caused by a primary, age-related, non￾obstructive acinar atrophy and on the other by obstructive MGD.
This is in keeping with the observations of Nien et al. [960], at the
cellular level, of reduced meibocyte differentiation and cell cycling,
together with reduced expression of the lipogenesis factor, perox￾isome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR g), in subjects
over 50 years of age. Also, there are known, age-related changes in
meibum polar and neutral lipid composition [627]. This article also
reports that aging in men and women was also accompanied by a
significant increase in eyelid erythema, telangiectasia, scurf, kera￾tinization, irregular posterior margins, meibomian gland orifice
metaplasia, and meibomian gland secretion opacity. Potentially,
both simple atrophy and obstructive MGD could provide the basis
for reduced delivery of meibum with aging.
10.2.2. The influence of sex hormones on meibomian gland function
Meibomian function is strongly influenced by the sex hormones,
particularly androgens. In brief, androgens stimulate the synthesis
and secretion of lipids by the meibomian gland and suppress the
expression of genes related to keratinization [36,49,653,961,962].
Conversely a deficiency of androgen action, such as occurs in aging,
Sjogren syndrome, antiandrogen treatment and complete €
androgen insensitivity syndrome, is associated with MGD, altered
meibum lipid profiles and evidence of decreased tear film stability
[36,622,623,628]. The influence of sex hormones and other hor￾mones on meibomian gland function and disease is dealt with in
full in the TFOS DEWS II Sex, Gender and Hormones report [1222].
10.2.3. Meibomian gland dysfunction
The term ‘meibomian gland dysfunction’ (MGD) was introduced
by Korb and Henriquez in 1981 and has been used for many years to
identify the most common etiology of EDE and to distinguish it
from other meibomian gland diseases [963,964]. It is established in
the literature and provides a convenient label for a well￾characterized condition. It may be that in its earliest stages it
takes the form of a functional disorder that impairs the delivery of
meibomian oil to the lid margin but in the form that presents
clinically, it is a disease state, which involves pathological modifi-
cations to the gland that may be irreversible. The term obstructive
MGD was coined by Mathers [965]. An excellent review of the
history and concept of MGD and its relationship to other forms of
blepharitis was published by Blackie and Korb [184].
10.2.3.1. High meibum delivery state e meibomian seborrhea.
MGD has been sub-classified into high oil delivery and low oil de￾livery states (Fig. 12). The prevalence of high delivery states has not
been reported but it is likely to be uncommon. It is referred to as
meibomian seborrhea [966] and is encountered in association with
seborhoeic dermatitis and rosacea. Diagnosis has been based upon
the manual expression of high volumes of meibum from affected
glands and inference that it is a meibomian hypersecretory state is
an assumption that awaits confirmation. It would be valuable to
demonstrate, in patients designated as having meibomian sebor￾rhea that the condition of high volume expressability persists over
an extended period of time. At present there are no reliable
methods to evaluate meibomian secretory rate but TFLL thickness
was significantly increased in a group of patients with DED asso￾ciated with hypersecretory MGD and lid margin inflammation
[967]. A causal role for hypersecretory MGD and DED is not
established.
10.2.3.2. Low meibum delivery states - obstructive meibomian gland
dysfunction. MGD is the most common cause of low meibum de￾livery, chiefly due to obstructive disease. Obstructive MGD is the
most common cause of EDE [37,180,968] and it is believed that
MGD-dependent EDE is the most common form of DED overall
[36,376,506,969,970,1066,1211,1212]. It was recently defined at the
TFOS Workshop on MGD, as follows and further details may be
found in that report [36,506,970]: “meibomian gland dysfunction
(MGD) is a chronic, diffuse abnormality of the meibomian glands,
commonly characterized by terminal duct obstruction and/or quali￾tative/quantitative changes in the glandular secretion. This may result
in alteration of the tear film, symptoms of eye irritation, clinically
apparent inflammation, and ocular surface disease”.
MGD may be primary or secondary. Primary MGD appears
spontaneously and has no known disease association. Its preva￾lence increases with age. Secondary MGD has such an association,
for instance with eyelid laxity [971] and eyelid tattooing [544a]. In
particular, MGD may regularly accompany certain skin diseases
such as rosacea, atopic and seborrheic dermatitis psoriasis and
icthyosis [966,972] and may be induced by inflammatory disease of
the lids and ocular surface and by chemical exposures, including
topical benzalkonium chloride-containing topical medications for
glaucoma. The manner in which MGD contributes to and is
amplified by, DED, is reviewed by Baudouin et al. [385].
MGD exists in cicatricial and non-cicatricial forms [37].
10.2.3.2.1. Cicatricial MGD. In primary, cicatricial MGD, duct
obstruction results from elongation, stretching and narrowing of
the terminal ducts, so that each orifice and associated duct is
dragged from its position anterior to the mucocutaneous junction,
into the marginal conjunctival mucosa. As this occurs, the affected
terminal duct comes to lie horizontally and is visible as a charac￾teristic, elevated ridge in the occlusal mucosa of the free margin of
the lid, which represents the dragged terminal ducts exposed under
a thinned mucosal epithelium [37]. Primary, cicatricial MGD may
affect scattered glands in the same lid exhibiting non-cicatricial
MGD. It is probably less common than obstructive MGD but the
frequency of its occurrence has not been documented.
Secondary, cicatricial MGD is caused by conjunctival scarring
and occurs in cicatricial conjunctival diseases. It may also accom￾pany rosacea and vernal kerato-conjunctivitis. The process is more
extensive than in primary disease and the orifices and ducts are
dragged into the tarsal mucosa, where, in severe cicatricial disease
they may no longer be visible, as they are absorbed into the scar
tissue. In both the primary and secondary forms of the disease, even
at an early stage when the ducts are still patent, once the orifices
have been dragged into the mucosa, and therefore into the region of
the tear meniscus, the glands are unable to deliver their oil onto the
surface of the tear film. With increasing severity the process leads
to duct obstruction. Cicatricial MGD has not been studied histo￾logically and would benefit from clinicopathological study directed
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 482
specifically at orifices, ducts and glands. The Subcommittee rec￾ommends that this avenue should be pursued.
10.2.3.2.2. Non-cicatricial MGD. In non-cicatricial MGD, the
terminal ducts are obstructed by a process of hyperkeratinisation
[494,625] and the shedding of duct lining cells into the duct lumen
to form keratotic plugs [36,39,973,974]. The hyperkeratinisation
process may be linked to the significantly increased expression of
keratin genes in meibomian glands of patients with MGD [505].
Further, it is likely that obstruction is compounded by an increase in
meibomian lipid viscosity due to changes in meibomian lipid
chemistry, and possibly interactions of lipids with cytokeratin
proteins [183,975]. The relative contribution of cell debris and
increased lipid viscosity to the obstructive process is not known.
The gland orifices remain located in the skin of the lid margin,
initially anterior to the MCJ [37] although, with age they may come
to lie behind it as the MCJ migrates forwards [454]. This has ther￾apeutic implications, since, if gland function can be restored, the
orifices remain in position for oil delivery. Obstruction is accom￾panied by a thickening and clouding of expressed meibum, which
blocks the ducts and causes plugging of the orifices. Obstruction
leads to secondary, disuse- or pressure-atrophy of the glands
[494,976,977], which appears as gland ‘dropout’ on meibography
[959]. Gland loss is similar between right and left eyes and corre￾lated between the upper and lower lids. But there are regional
differences, with less loss in the upper than lower lid [978,979] and
greater losses nasally and temporally [979,980]. Dropout correlates
positively with MGD grade and is inversely related to meibomian
gland expressibility, TFLL thickness and TBUT [959,980e983]. In
another report, dropout correlated positively with the OSDI
symptom score and ocular surface staining [983]. Of interest,
reduced expressibility, consistent with a diagnosis of MGD, may
occur in the absence of meibographic dropout [980]. (see the TFOS
DEWS II Tear Film report for further details).
Non-cicatricial MGD most commonly occurs as a primary disor￾der, seen with increasing frequency after the age of 50 years [626]. It
also has multiple secondary associations, including dermatoses such
as rosacea, seborrheic dermatitis, and atopic dermatitis [966,972].
Additionally, the retinoid, isotretinoin, used in the treatment of acne
vulgaris, causesmeibomian gland atrophy in a proportion of patients,
which may be accompanied by features of MGD [644,648].
Fig. 12. A schematic diagram to show the etiology and mechanism of meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD). Although many mechanistic aspects are not yet understood, the figure
attempts to summarize the current view. The upper part of the figure illustrates the etiology of the two forms of MGD which result in low delivery of meibomian oil; cicatricial and
non-cicatricial MGD. With age, there is an increase in meibomian gland dropout, particularly after the age of 50 years, which correlates with the appearance of primary MGD. A fall
in bioavailable androgens may contribute to these events. In youth, treatment of acne vulgaris with cis-retinoic acid may induce gland atrophy and MGD, while in an older age
group, androgen receptor insensitivity or blockade may induce signs of MGD. Polychlorinated biphenyls may cause a systemic disorder which includes MGD-like features. Certain
skin disorders are strongly associated with MGD. In general, acne rosacea, atopic dermatitis, seborrhea sicca and psoriasis are associated with non-cicatricial MGD, while cicatricial
conjunctival diseases such as trachoma, erythema multiforme and pemphigoid, lead to cicatricial MGD. A key event in non-cicatricial MGD is hyperkeratinisation of the terminal
duct, leading to duct obstruction, duct dilatation and disuse atrophy of the glands. Later, obliteration of the orifices may occur. Obstruction may be exacerbated by changes in oil
composition which increase meibum viscosity. The degree to which inflammatory changes are found around affected glands varies in different reports, but signs of inflammation are
common at the lid margin. Inflammatory mediators and lipids may be released onto the ocular surface to cause epithelial damage. In cicatricial MGD, submucosal conjunctival
scarring drags the Meibomian orifices, terminal ducts and mucocutaneous junction posteriorly, across the posterior lid border and onto the tarsal plate, where the narrowed and
displaced ducts can no longer deliver oil effectively to the tear film lipid layer. Low meibum delivery and changes in oil composition lead to tear film instability, increased
evaporation and ultimately to evaporative dry eye (EDE). In low delivery MGD, symptoms may arise from the local lid disease itself, from lid disease with ocular surface damage and
from EDE. In meibomian seborrhea, gland expression releases abundant quantities of meibum from the gland orifices, which has lead to the concept that this is a hypersecretory
condition. There is less gland dropout than in obstructive MGD and there are distinctive changes in meibum composition.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 483
In non-cicatricial MGD, diagnosis is based on the morphologic
changes in the meibomian orifices and gland acini observed by
biomicroscopy, non-contact meibography and confocal microscopy.
The orifices become narrowed and the distinctive ring that sur￾rounds them in health becomes less visible [37,984]. In severe
disease, at a stage when there is increased vascularity and the
appearance of telangiectasia at the lid margin, the orifices may be
distorted, finally becoming scarred and atrophic. At an earlier stage,
features include plugging of the orifices by cellular debris and
thickening, clouding or absence of expressed excreta. Histologically,
it has been said that there is limited inflammatory reaction
[624,625], but periglandular inflammatory cell infiltration has been
reported in severe MGD, based on confocal microscopy. Infiltrates
appear as roundish bodies with high reflectivity. These are reduced
in number after intensive therapy with lid hygiene, topical steroids,
topical non-preserved artificial tears and topical and oral antibi￾otics, in a comparative trial against lid hygiene and topical non￾preserved artificial tears alone [985]. Hyper-reflective dots have
also been observed in Sjogren syndrome-associated MGD € [733].
Identification of such dots is required at histological level.
Methods exist to grade MGD [984,986,1206], by scoring the
degree of gland dropout (meibography) [959,986,987], the amount
of oil in the lid margin reservoir (meibometry) [186,988] and the
appearance and spreading characteristics and thickness of the TFLL
(interferometry) [195,989]. Confocal microscopy is being used,
increasingly, to quantify the glandular changes in fine detail [390].
MGD is a symptomatic condition in its own right whose
symptoms result from lid involvement and ocular surface inflam￾mation in the absence of increased evaporation [376]. However,
with progression of disease, the degree and extent of obstruction
results in a reduced delivery of meibum to the tear film [36,180], a
TFLL deficiency [190] and loss of its barrier function [175]. Lipid
compositional changes, a reduced spread time and lipid layer
instability also play a part in the increased evaporation rate that
leads to EDE [195,375,376,965,990,991].
In their summary of the MGD literature, Blackie and Korb have
emphasized that, notwithstanding the features of well-established
disease, MGD may often present as an asymptomatic condition
with normal lid margin appearances at the slit-lamp [184]. This
form of MGD, which they call non-obvious MGD, (NOMGD) was
recognised at the outset of the description of MGD [964] and has
been noted by other authors [974]. Because there are no overt signs
of disease, diagnosis must be based on a change in quality of
expressed secretions. In an elderly male population over 60 years of
age, a majority had at least one abnormal MGD parameter such as
non-obvious meibum quality or visible lid vascularity, where lower
lipid quality but not higher vascularity were significantly correlated
with advancing age and DED symptoms [992].
Blackie et al. [184] emphasize the need to perform meibomian
gland expression on a routine basis in order to detect NOMGD and
recommend the use of standardized expression, using their
custom-made expression device [993,994]. This offers the added
advantage of providing a numerical score for expression, the
number of Meibomian Glands Yielding Liquid Secretion (the
MGYLS score). It is suggested that DED symptoms may be precipi￾tated in patients with NOMGD in conditions of desiccating or other
forms of ocular surface stress, as with contact lens wear [964], or in
air-conditioned environments when performing work at video
display terminals, so-called “office eye” [995e998].
10.2.3.2.3. Tear volume in meibomian gland dysfunction. In the
steady state, tear meniscus dimensions such as height, radius of
curvature and cross-sectional area are surrogates for meniscus
volume and tear volume and flow [170]. They are, as expected,
reduced in ADDE [172,477b,999e1001]. In a study by Tung et al.,
tear meniscus height and area were reduced compared to controls,
in patients with both NSDE and SSDE, and correlated negatively
with epithelial corneal damage [999]. Patients with a tear meniscus
height of <210 mm had a relative risk of 4.65 for developing severe
corneal epithelial disease (corneal fluorescein staining > 10) with
an odds ratio ¼ 5.59.
It has been predicted that, in MGD-related EDE with normal
lacrimal function, tear flow and hence tear volume and meniscus
dimensions will be sustained by a compensatory response, driven
by the Lacrimal Functional Unit [207]. In keeping with this, Tung
et al. showed a non-significant difference between normal control
values of tear meniscus height and area in a group of symptomatic
MGD patients with a reduced BUT [999]. In another study it was
concluded that an increase in tear production likely compensates
for the loss of meibomian glands in patients with MGD [1002].
10.2.3.2.4. MGD secondary to systemic chemical exposure.
Also, occurring in rare epidemics, systemic exposure to poly￾chlorinated biphenyls, through ingestion of contaminated cooking
oils, causes a chronic disorder with gross and extensive acneiform
skin changes, meibomian seborrhea with thick excreta and glan￾dular cyst formation [633,1003].
10.2.3.2.5. Anterior blepharitis-related MGD. Meibomian Gland
Dysfunction may occur in conjunction with anterior blepharitis,
particularly when they are both secondary manifestations of a
dermatosis such as rosacea [641,966,1004e1006]. One potential
source of inflammation is the commensal bacteria of the lid [1007]
whose lipolytic enzymes are capable of degrading meibum, with
the production of altered lipid species, such as free fatty acids, that
are irritant to the tissues [1008,1009]. McCully and Dougherty
[1007] reviewed the plethora of bacterial products capable of
inducing inflammation, including lipopolysaccaride (LPS), chemo￾attractant lipids such as the aldehyde 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE)
derived from unsaturated fatty acids, reactive oxygen species and
lipid-derived inflammatory mediators such as arachidonic acid,
which are the source of prostaglandins and leukotrienes. The role of
microorganisms in the etiology of MGD is not fully established and
not all studies report an increased bacterial commensal population
or a consistent bacterial profile. A recent report showed signifi-
cantly higher culture rates for aerobes (especially S. Epidermidis)
and anaerobes (especially P. Acnes) in expressed meibum and the
conjunctival sacs of patients with MGD alone, and a more complex
bacterial profile compared to controls [63], but in another report,
no difference in bacterial spectrum, in either lid or expressed
meibum cultures, was found between MGD patients and controls
despite the presence of anterior blepharitis in 76% of the MGD
patients [1010]. A higher than expected frequency of P. acnes-pos￾itive meibum cultures reported in meibomitis-related keratocon￾junctivitis (MRKC) has been invoked to explain an association with
the phlyctenular-like keratitis in young girls or adolescent females,
acting through a delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) mechanism
[1011].
Another cause of anterior blepharitis is the ectoparasite
Demodex, which is found increasingly with age on the surface of
the human body [1012-1014]. Demodex folliculorum, is found in hair
and eye-lash follicles and Demodex brevis, within sebaceous glands
including the meibomian glands [1012-1014]. Demodex infestation
of the lids is suggested by the presence of cyclindrical dandruff
around the lash bases [1015] and may be confirmed by demon￾stration of the mites on epilated lashes. They have been observed
non-invasively at the orifices of meibomian glands, by IVCM [1016]
but their causative role in MGD [1017] and DED is not established.
The subject is reviewed by Cheng et al., [1018].
10.2.3.2.6. Genetically determined meibomian gland diseases.
DED may be caused by a general absence of the meibomian glands
or by diffuse changes in the glands distinct from those that char￾acterise MGD.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 484
10.2.3.2.6.1. Meibomian agenesis and dystichiasis
Meibomian glands may be absent or partially absent as a spo￾radic condition [1019], or congenitally replaced by an extra row of
lashes (distichiasis). Distichiasis may also occur as part of a wider,
dominantly inherited syndrome of distichiasis with lower limb
lymphoedema, that results from truncation mutations of the fork￾head transcription factor, FOXC2 [1020]. A mouse model of this
disorder exists, caused by the targeted disruption of FOXC2 [1021].
The meibomian glands may be diffusely affected in certain rare,
inherited disorders such as anhydrotic ectodermal dysplasia, epi￾dermolysis bullosa and ichthyosis, and has also been reported in
Turner syndrome.
10.2.3.2.6.2. Anhydrotic ectodermal dysplasia
Anhydrotic ectodermal dysplasia refers to a group of inherited
disorders accompanied by malformations of ectodermal skin ap￾pendages such as teeth, hairs, nails and glands, including the
meibomian glands. Over 90% of patients show a reduction of eye￾brows, alterations of eye lashes and changes to the meibomian
glands. Ninety four percent of such patients were reported to suffer
from DED symptoms in a large case series reported by Kaercher
[1006b], who suggested that meibomian gland changes, detected
by meibography, are the most reliable ocular sign of ectodermal
dysplasia. It is likely that the meibomian epithelial cells are affected
directly by the genetic defect and that the gland and ducts are
affected diffusely.
The syndrome of Ectrodactyly (split-hand or foot), Ectodermal
dysplasia, and Clefting (cleft lip and or uvula and palate)-(EEC), is
caused by mutations in the DNA-binding region of the gene p63,
controlling a transcription factor, active during embryogenesis, and
concerned with stem cell differentiation in stratified epithelia. It
may occur sporadically or be inherited as an autosomal dominant
disorder with variable phenotypic expression and penetrance. The
condition is well reviewed by Di Iorio et al., [1022] who found an
absence of the meibomian glands in almost 100% of their cohort
and reduced aqueous secretion in 60%. Lacrimal drainage obstruc￾tion (including absence, stenosis or occlusion of the puncta and/or
canaliculi) is reported in 59%e100% of cases. The major cause of
visual morbidity, giving rise to a dense vascular keratopathy, is
limbal stem cell deficiency, which was seen in 60.9% of the Di Iorio
series.
10.2.3.2.6.3. Epidermolysis bullosa
EB describes a spectrum of genetically-determined, bullous,
mucocutaneous disorders, characterized by fragility and rupturing
of the skin in response to friction or mild mechanical trauma
[1023,1024]. The level of ocular involvement generally parallels that
of the skin and consists of recurrent corneal and conjunctival ero￾sions and scarring and, in the case of the conjunctiva, sym￾blepharon. Repeated corneal and conjunctival blistering can lead to
corneal abrasion, punctate keratopathy, symblepharon, ectropion,
entropion, and corneal scarring, with reduced visual acuity and
even blindness [1025-1028]. Tong et al. [1029], reported the inci￾dence of ocular complications to be 4% in the dominant form of
dystrophic EB (DDEB), 12% in the most common and mildest form,
EB simplex, (EBS), 40% in junctional EB (JEB) and 51% in the severe,
recessive form of dystrophic EB (RDEB). Of these, JEB and RDEB are
less common than DDEB and much less common than EBS.
Subtypes of EB result from mutations affecting the functional
integrity of the dermo-epidermal junction and of the equivalent
region of the mucosa. They are designated according to the ultra￾structural level of the blister formation. In the most common form,
EBS, separation occurs within the basal layer of the epithelium,
with less likelihood of scarring than in the recessive form, where
cleavage occurs at the level of the anchoring fibrils [1030]. In JEB the
level of cleavage is within the lamina lucida of the hemi￾desmosomal complex and results in defective epithelial adhesion.
One form of JEB (JEB Herlitz), results in extensive disease and death
in infancy [1031].
The frequency of lid abnormalities in children with EB, was
based in the past on retrospective studies [1030] and confined to
comment on the presence or absence of ‘blepharitis’ [1032,1033].
This has been reported to vary from 0.37% to 17.65%, depending on
EB subtype [1034]. Jones et al. [1030], in a large prospective study
from Great Ormond St. London, point out that the National EB
registry reports blepharitis as an uncommon finding, with highest
frequencies in RDEB inversa and severe, generalized RDEB
(approximately 18% in each) and in JEB subtypes (6%e7%) [1034]. In
contrast, Jones et al. [1030], reported a high frequency of MGD in all
subtypes of EB with the greatest frequency and severity in the more
severe forms, particularly RDEB and JEB. In this carefully conducted
study, diagnosis of MGD was based upon the findings of gland
orifice plugging and capping, lid margin telangiectasia, lid margin
rounding, and retroplacement of the mucocutaneous junction.
Because of the problems associated with lid manipulation, it was
not possible to perform either gland expression or meibography in
this group of patients. The authors were not able to determine
whether MGD was of primary origin or secondary to the EB-related
ocular surface disease but they emphasized that once established, it
must contribute to the frequency and severity of ocular surface
disease by means of lid- and DED-related mechanisms and there￾fore demanded treatment in its own right.
10.2.3.2.6.4. Ichthyosis follicularis, atrichia and photophobia
syndrome
Ichthyosis follicularis, atrichia and photophobia syndrome
(IFAP) is a rare X-linked disorder characterized by a non-cicatricial
alopecia, with absent eyebrows and lashes, with photophobia of
neonatal onset and a generalized cutaneous follicular hyperkera￾tosis. It is an inherited disorder of lipid metabolism. Disease
severity ranges from mild skin disease to severe variants with
multiple extracutaneous features (brain anomalies, retardation,
ectodermal dysplasia and skeletal deformities [1035].
The typical skin finding in IFAP is of ‘thorn-like’, follicular pro￾jections which impart a nutmeg-grater feel to the affected skin.
Hyperkeratoses are sometimes seen over the elbows, knees, and
dorsal fingers, while the palms and soles of the feet, the teeth, nails
and sweat glands are unaffected [1035,1036]. Hair shafts and
sebaceous glands are lacking [1036-1039], suggesting a failure of
development of the pilosebaceous unit and Eramo reported plug￾ged and irregularly spaced meibomian glands in an affected boy,
aged 3, suggesting the presence of MGD or related meibomian
gland disease [1036]. It is not yet certain whether meibomian
glands as such are even present and this aspect of the disorder
deserves comprehensive review. Histopathology of leg skin in this
patient showed that the central lumen of all hair follicles contained
only keratotic debris. There were no sebaceous glands or normal
hair shafts. Well-developed sweat glands were present and mild
mononuclear perivascular infiltrates. In female carriers, the trait
may be non-penetrant or present with minor features.
Photophobia in this condition is likely to be due to keratitis,
probably with a contribution from the MGD. Punctate epithelial
erosions, pannus and progressive corneal vascularization and
stromal opacification may lead to severe visual loss [1038].
IFAP is caused by mutations in the gene MBTPS2 (membrane￾bound transcription factor peptidase, site 2 (S1P), located on
chromosome Xp22.1 [1040], which is involved in the regulation of
lipid biosynthesis. Oeffner et al. demonstrated a genotype/pheno￾type correlation between clinical severity and the effect mutations
on peptidase activity [1041]. As discussed elsewhere in this report
(Section 4.3), the proteases SIP and S2P work cooperatively to
activate SREBP transcription factors and target a broad range of
genes engaged in cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism. This is in
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 485
keeping with the failure of pilosebaceous development in this
condition apparently also affecting the meibomian glands.
A related disorder, also inherited as an X-linked trait and due to
mutations in MBTPS2, is Keratosis Follicularis Spinulosa Decalvans
(KFSD) [1041,1042]. Like IFAP, KFSD exhibits the combination of
follicular ichthyosis, alopecia and photophobia, but differs by
reason of a later onset of, and more patchy distribution of, alopecia.
The occurrence of atrophy and scarring of follicles is a later feature
and the cicatricial alopecia contrasts with the scar-free alopecia of
IFAP. Also, hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles and dorsal fingers
occurs in KFSD but not in IFAP [1035]. Fong et al. [1035], reported an
overlap in clinical and molecular features between IFAP and KSFD.
10.3. Disorders of lid aperture, congruity and dynamics
A newly reported variant of nocturnal lagophthalmos, inade￾quate lid seal [544b], refers to the inability of apparently closed lids
to exclude air from the ocular surface during sleep. It may be
responsible for symptoms occurring immediately upon rising.
Diagnosis is made with a “light test’, using a transilluminator
pressed against the closed lids. A strong correlation between a
positive light test and symptoms immediately upon waking was
reported in a Level 2 study.
As noted earlier, incomplete lid closure of some degree is not
uncommon in normal subjects during blinking [343b,409]. In
normal subjects, increased ocular surface exposure and evapora￾tion occurs in upgaze [288], so that DES may be imposed in the
workplace by activities that demand attention by attending to
goods placed on high shelves and to extreme elevation of the globes
while the head is inclined downward as when taking aim when
playing billiards. Elevations on the surface of the globe, close to the
limbus, may also impair tear spreading and cause localized drying
and dellen formation [1043,1044].
Incomplete lid closure or lid deformity, leading to increased
exposure or poor tear film resurfacing, is accepted as a cause of
ocular drying following a VIIth cranial nerve palsy (lagophthalmos)
or after surgery to the lids [1045]. The relationship between VIIth
cranial nerve palsy and the development of MGD [1046-1048] is of
particular interest and its mechanism deserves further study. Wan
et al. showed a clear correlation between the duration and severity
of VIIth nerve palsy and the onset and evolution of MGD [1048].
Tear breakup time was reduced in all groups of VIIth n. palsy.
An increase in palpebral fissure width or globe prominence
exposes the tear film to greater evaporation [1049] and the risk of
ocular desiccation and tear hyperosmolarity. In Graves' orbitopathy,
the effect of proptosis on exposure is compounded by lid retraction
and lid lag, incomplete blinking or lid closure and by restriction of
eye movements, each of which may compromise tear spreading
[197]. Kim et al. found an increase in meibomian gland dropout in
Graves' orbitopathy, correlating with a shortened TBUT, the degree
of exophthalmos and palpebral aperture height [1050]. Increased
gland dropout is also encountered with ocular prosthetic use [1051]
and there is also an association with lid laxity [1052], with DED
features including a decreased Schirmer score, reduced TBUT and
increased corneal staining [971]. A parallel may be drawn between
these conditions, with the proposition that gland dropout may be
the consequence of meibum stasis due to incomplete or imperfect
blinking. A contributing factor could also be the action of tear
hyperosmolarity and inflammatory mediators at the apex of the
tear menisci, close to the terminal meibomian ducts [451].
10.3.1. Other blink-related disorders
A reduced blink rate is potential basis for DED in Parkinson's
disease and in progressive ophthalmoplegia [1053], where, in
addition, the spreading of tears is impaired by an altered blink
action and a reduction in eye movements. Other contributing fac￾tors in Parkinson's disease include reduced meibomian oil delivery,
decreased reflex tearing due to autonomic dysfunction [1054] and
possibly effects of androgen deficiency on the lacrimal and mei￾bomian glands [1055].
10.4. Ocular surface-related evaporative dry eye
10.4.1. Allergic eye disease
Ocular allergies include a variety of clinical conditions (namely
Seasonal Allergic Conjunctivitis-SAC, Perennial Allergic Conjuncti￾vitis- PAC, Vernal Kerato-Conjunctivitis eVKC and Atopic Kerato￾Conjunctivitis e AKC) ranging from mild, to severe and sight￾threatening ocular diseases.
Although the pathophysiology of allergic eye disease, unlike that
of DED, involves mostly a Th2 lymphocyte mechanism, these con￾ditions may share some clinical and biochemical features.
Thus:
a) In each, the conjunctiva is hyperaemic or inflamed, the
corneal epithelium may be damaged and the corneal nerves
affected; the tear film is rich in inflammatory cytokines,
mediators and neuro-mediators that can initiate and main￾tain chronic inflammation. MGD is reported as a feature of
allergic eye disease [1056] and may be a source of DED.
Fibrosis and scarring are common outcomes in severe
allergic conditions such as AKC and VKC as a result of a long￾standing inflammation.
b) Mucosal hyper-responsiveness to non-specific environ￾mental stimuli has been described in both ocular allergy and
DED. Patients with VKC show hyper-responsiveness to non￾specific, non-allergic challenges such as histamine, air
pollution or other environmental agents [1057-1060]. Simi￾larly, in DED, both in experimental models and in humans,
signs of ocular surface damage are induced by oxidative
stress [767,770,772,1062,1063] or commonly encountered
environmental factors such as air conditioning and dust, or
pollutants such as smoke [772,1061].
c) Both allergy and DED show a favorable response to topical
anti-inflammatory agents such as steroids and cyclosporine.
Artificial tears, that are routinely used for DED patients may
improve symptoms in all the clinical varieties of ocular al￾lergy [1,770].
d) Both conditions have a negative impact on the quality of life
as they evolve. In particular, increasing discomfort and a
reduction of the visual function may be present in the severe
forms of each disease, particularly when performing visual
tasks requiring continuous attention (e.g. driving, reading,
computer work and attention at school).
By contrast, ocular allergy and DED represent two different clin￾ical entities with distinct immune cells involved in their pathogenic
mechanism and a different histopathology (for instance increase of
goblet cells in allergy [1064] and decreased numbers in DED [434].
Ocular allergy is a disease of youth while DED is more common at an
older age when signs and symptoms of allergy generally disappear.
They also differ in the quality of symptoms experienced, with allergic
patients complaining in particular of itching and photophobia and
DED patients of grittiness and foreign body sensation.
Intense itching is typical of VKC and, together with photophobia,
is the constant and major symptom of allergic eye disease [1065].
Although it is sometimes listed as a symptom of DED, its frequency
intensity and topographic reference are not described. It would be
of interest to know whether it is a symptom of DED secondary to
some form of blepharitis rather than, specifically, to DED itself.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 486
Corneal involvement in the form of diffuse punctate keratitis or
a shield ulcer is typical of the severe forms of allergy. Conversely,
DED is associated with a different fluorescein pattern including the
involvement of the interpalpebral and most exposed ocular surface
[74,1066].
A few biological markers of inflammation may be common to
both DED and allergic eye disease but eosinophils, eosinophil￾derived products and mast cells are typical findings in allergic
eye disease [543,1067,1068]. Their absence in a patient with ocular
surface symptoms points against a diagnosis of allergic eye disease,
but their presence does not exclude DED. Demonstration of a
shortened tear film breakup in patients with allergy biomarkers
would support the presence of both conditions [1069]. A few clin￾ical entities exist, such as that occurring in young women with
polycystic ovaries, who show features of both conditions [1070].
Although the mechanism for this is not established, it is likely that
sex hormones and insulin resistance play a part (see TFOS DEWS II
Sex, Gender and Hormones report).
Allergic eye diseases and DED are distinct clinical entities but
some overlapping features suggest a complex interaction of
mechanisms involving the immune, endocrine and nervous
systems.
10.4.2. Vitamin A deficiency
Vitamin A regulates epithelial growth, cell proliferation and
differentiation [1071,1072]. Systemic vitamin A insufficiency re￾mains an important cause of childhood mortality and blindness in
many low-to middle income countries [1073,1074]. In the eyes,
vitamin A deficiency induces xerophthalmia [1075], which includes
night blindness [1076], conjunctival xerosis [1077], Bitot's spots
[1078-1080], corneal xerosis [1081] and keratomalacia [1077]. Two
forms of DED are recognised and may occur together. One is due to
defective ocular surface wetting and the other to lacrimal gland
insufficiency [1082]. Poor wetting can be caused by a defective
epithelial glycocalyx at the ocular surface, to a loss of goblet cells,
and finally to ocular surface metaplasia and epithelial keratiniza￾tion. Paradoxically, in current times, xerophthalmia may be
encountered in developed countries following bariatric surgery for
obesity, due to decreased vitamin A absorption from the small in￾testine [659].
Vitamin A deficiency in the animal model can induce epithelial
keratinization and squamous metaplasia (with Bitot's spot forma￾tion) [1083,1084] and also a profound decrease of conjunctival
goblet cell density [1077,1083,1085]. Vitamin A is involved in the
biosynthesis of glycoconjugates and is involved in mucin glyco￾sylation in the ocular surface epithelium [1086,1087]. There is ev￾idence of abnormal mucin synthesis in vitamin A deficiency. In the
rat model, membrane-associated mucin rMUC4 mRNA and secre￾tory mucin rMUC5AC mRNA were not detected in vitamin A defi-
cient animals [1088]. In the human conjunctival epithelial cells,
retinoic acid is associated with upregulation of MUC16 through an
action on secretory phospholipase A2 Group IIA [1089]. Addition￾ally, in a primary human corneal limbal epithelial cell culture
model, retinoic acid stimulates MUC1, MUC4 and MUC16 expres￾sion and improves glycocalyx barrier function in a dose-dependent
manner [1090]. Retinoic acid also destroys the meibomian gland.
Please refer to the TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic Dry Eye report [1227].
10.4.3. Short breakup time dry eye
The term short breakup time DED (SBUDE) refers to a symp￾tomatic form of DED with a fluorescein breakup time of  5 s,
occurring in the presence of a normal tear secretion and tear
clearance, normal meibomian gland function and unassociated
with epithelial damage [1069]. Symptoms include those of dryness,
ocular fatigue and blurred vision, with a substantial effect on the
quality of life (QoL).
In the study of Yamamoto et al., in those patients presenting
with a “spot type” of breakup (¼ 0 s), females were affected more
commonly than males (ratio 3:1), with a peak frequency of 60 years
in women and 20 years in men [1091]. SBUDE appears to be a
common form of DED in the workplace in Japan. In the Osaka study
of office workers engaged in prolonged work at VDTs, 244 out of
303 recruited subjects (80.5%) were diagnosed with SBUDE [1092],
which was highly symptomatic [165b] and associated with
decreased functional visual acuity [298], QoL [1093,1094] and loss
of productivity [442]. Its elucidation is of high priority.
The mechanism of SBUDE is not yet established but current
research suggests that it is precipitated by defective wetting of the
ocular surface. In a study comparing patients with SBUDE or ADDE
with normal controls, patients in each group had a fluorescein
breakup time of  5 s and MGD was excluded [425]. Neither
Schirmer test values nor vital staining scores differed significantly
between subjects with SBUDE and healthy controls. The expression
of mRNA for both MUC1 and MUC 16 was significantly lower in
patients than in controls, but there was no difference between the
two patient groups, implying that a loss of wettability was likely to
have played a similar role in each group. Curiously, conjunctival
impression cytology showed no significant differences in goblet cell
density or level of squamous metaplasia among the 3 groups.
Where it has been assessed, the tear film lipid layer is normal prior
to breakup, too, suggesting that breakup is not triggered by a tear
lipid deficiency. The source of symptoms in the absence of signifi-
cant ocular surface staining is also intriguing and for the present it
is assumed to relate to surface hyperosmolarity induced at the site
of breakup.
In a study of 96 Japanese office workers working regularly with
VDTs, the prevalence of definite and probable DED was 9% and 57%,
respectively. The mean MUC5AC concentration was lower in the
tears of VDT users with definite DED than in those with no DED and
the mean MUC5AC concentration in tears was lower in the group
that worked longer hours [1095a]. Also, MUC5AC concentration
was lower in subjects with symptomatic eye-strain than in
asymptomatic individuals [1095a]. These results, together, suggest
that the circumstances of prolonged VDT use induces changes in
mucin expression that reduce ocular surface wettability and
contribute to DED symptoms in this community. The pattern of tear
breakup in SBUDE is of the so-called ‘spot’ or ‘dimple’ variety and
studies are underway to explore whether these patterns are spe￾cifically related to surface mucin deficiency [1095b]. So-called, ‘line’
and ‘area’ breakup pattern are associated with ADDE, with ‘line’
breakup seen in mild to moderate ADDE and ‘area’ breakup in se￾vere ADDE.
Some success in the treatment of SBUDE is claimed for topical
diquafosol sodium, a purinergic agonist which stimulates
conjunctival water and gel mucin production [1096,1098], and also
with rebamipide, which is reported to increase goblet cell density
and also, gel mucin production [1097]. Both agents are claimed to
increase the expression of membrane-associated mucins. (See the
TFOS DEWS II Management and Therapy report for further details
[1228]).
10.4.4. Ocular surface disease due to topical agents
(See the TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic Dry Eye report[1227].)
11. Summary and recommendations
The Subcommittee has reviewed how the physiology of the
ocular surface is affected by, and influences the onset and evolution
of, DED. There is good information about the control of lacrimal
secretion in humans but less about that of the meibomian glands,
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 487
surface epithelia and goblet cells. Methods to measure their
secretory performance in vivo are needed.
The structure and function of the precorneal tear film is still
under intense scrutiny. One current opinion suggests that the tear
film lipid layer alone is not a major barrier to water loss and that its
chief role is to stabilize the spreading tear film. It is nonetheless still
considered that deficiency and instability of the lipid layer en￾hances water loss sufficiently to generate clinically important
hyperosmolarity at the ocular surface and that this contributes to
ocular surface damage in DED.
The question of whether there is an aqueous subphase imme￾diately deep to the TFLL, as proposed by Wolff, is still debated.
Clinical observation suggests that the fluid drawn into the menisci
from the nascent tear film, in the upstroke of the blink, is more
watery than the precorneal film itself and it seems likely that an
aqueous layer is retained between the TFLL and the subjacent
mucoaqueous layer whose behavior is distinctly gel-like. The
mucoaqueous layer, deposited over the cornea during the blink, is
derived chiefly from the upper tarsal conjunctiva and is likely to
differ from that which coats the exposed bulbar conjunctiva, which
must arise from both the bulbar and tarsal conjunctiva. This may be
of relevance to SLK. In healthy eyes, zones of meniscus-induced
thinning may be imprinted onto the precorneal tear film in
various gaze positions and be associated with tear instability,
threatening its integrity. This phenomenon should be explored
further in healthy eyes in conditions of DES as well as in patients
with DED.
It has been hypothesized that the physiological line of
conjunctival staining at the lid margin, called Marx's line, is due to a
region of hyperosmolarity at the meniscus apex. Increased
permeability of the epithelium, also postulated at this site could
give pro-inflammatory proteins access to the terminal meibomian
ducts, explaining the association between the forward movement
of Marx's line with age and the occurrence of MGD. It would be
worthwhile to study the composition of the glycocalyx at this site
(expressed mucins and of galectin-3) and of layer 1 tight junctions
in human samples. Its permeability might be explored using fluo￾rescent dextrans.
Partial blinks are not uncommon in both normal and dry eyes
but occur more frequently in DED. Because of their effect on
evaporative loss this is important to the DED mechanism. It may
also direct the occurrence of punctate epitheliopathy to the lower
part of the globe in DED states.
The tear film is spread over the exposed ocular surface by the
blink, but eye movements also contribute to its deposition over the
peripheral cornea and bulbar conjunctiva. Shearing events between
the globe and the upper or lower lid wiper are likely to differ, with
friction directed more to the upper lid wiper by the blink and more
to the lower lid wiper by downgaze, with horizontal gaze move￾ments making additional contributions. This probably explains how
LWE affects both the upper and lower lid margins. Friction deliv￾ered by the blink will be greatest in the mid-zone of the upper lid
where the linear velocity of the excursion is greatest.
The physical concepts of boundary lubrication and hydrody￾namic lubrication are being usefully applied to the dynamics of lid
and globe movement. A new boundary lubricant, lubricin, of
corneal and conjunctival epithelial origin, has recently been
described and may be of importance in DED. A deficiency of
aqueous tears and the loss of ocular surface lubrication in various
forms of DED likely explain the increased frequency of punctate
epitheliopathy, SLK, filamentary keratitis and LWE in DED and the
symptoms associated with these conditions. It could also explain
the sensations of lid heaviness and the difficulty in opening the eye
on waking, in DED.
The epithelial glycocalyx is an integral component of the apical
membranes of surface epithelial cells. Its molecular composition is
now better known. It imparts wettability to the ocular surface,
which explains its lubricative and some of its barrier functions. The
contribution of intercellular tight junctions to this barrier is also
well understood. The epithelium turns over continuously and, as
old cells mature and die, the integrity and barrier function of this
layer for these cells is lost. It is likely that frictional forces between
the lids and the globe during blinking and eye movements,
participate in the shedding process. Although epithelial shedding is
said to be increased in DED, the shedding rate does not appear to
have been measured formally. The loss of barrier function in pre￾shed cells is hypothesized to account for a low level of punctate
staining of the normal corneal and conjunctival epithelium. About
17% of normal corneas show some degree of punctate staining after
the instillation of 0.125% of fluorescein and it is assumed that, over a
period of time, all corneas do so. The temporal aspects of such
staining in an individual are worthy of further study. We recom￾mend that, in clinical trials, zero staining should not be the default
for normality. Because stainability is dependent on instilled dye
concentration and the time of reading, methods of grading should
be standardized (see TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology report
[1225]).
Modeling considerations suggest that in healthy eyes the tear
osmolarity of the menisci is slightly lower than that over the
exposed ocular surface and that this discrepancy increases with
increasing meniscus hyperosmolarity in DED. It is further predicted
that, in DED, a wave of hyperosmolarity, driven by evaporative loss,
spreads from the epicentre of a tear breakup, reaching high levels,
of pathological and symptomatic consequence at the ocular surface,
which will not be fully reflected by meniscus sampling. The earlier
the onset of breakup in the blink interval, the longer the period of
exposure to hyperosmolarity. In specialised clinics we recommend
routine consideration of the ocular protection index in patients
with DED, as a measure of this threat. A high level of osmolarity in a
meniscus sample implies a much higher level at the ocular surface.
The Subcommittee found increasing evidence to support the
role of tissue hyperosmolarity at the ocular surface as a central
element in DED, generated by exposure to hyperosmolar tears,
particularly following tear film breakup. While stressing this, the
Subcommittee recognizes that the predicted high levels of osmo￾larity have not yet been measured directly at the corneal surface
and recommend that priority be given to the development of
methods to measure of molarity at the tissue level within the
interpalpebral zone.
A neutrophil defence mechanism (NETosis) known to be a
source of mucosal damage in other diseases such as cystic fibrosis,
may be a source of ocular surface damage in DED, amplified by
increased epithelial shedding, tear hyperosmolarity and a fall in
tear nuclease activity. DNA released into the tears (eDNA) from
desquamating epithelial cells and invading neutrophils can, inde￾pendently, or combined with other components of neutrophil
origin, cause damage the ocular surface. Dying neutrophils can
release their cellular contents into the extracellular space to form
sticky, antimicrobial, NETs. They form extracellular webs contain￾ing decondensed chromatin, histones, neutrophil elastase and
antimicrobial peptides, each of which individually may be toxic for
epithelial cells. Given that the tears are invaded physiologically by
abundant neutrophils during overnight eye closure it would seem
important to explore the relationship between the NET formation
and closed eye tear phenomena. The Subcommittee recommends
the investigation of closed eye tears and of conjunctival impression
cytology specimens in DED patients, immediately after periods of
prolonged eye closure.
In the TFOS DEWS report [1], the concept of a vicious circle of
inflammatory events at the ocular surface was put forward, as a
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 488
basis for the self-perpetuation of DED. Evidence indicated that tear
hyperosmolarity could initiate a damaging cascade of inflammation
at the ocular surface, which could decrease wettability, induce tear
film instability and breakup and thereby amplify tear hyper￾osmolarity. Importantly, a given etiology of DED may enter the vi￾cious circle at any point to participate in this process (Fig. 5)
Abundant supportive evidence for the concept has accumulated
since this time, at an experimental and clinical level, with detailed
knowledge of immune cell activation and invasion and of the in-
flammatory mediators and proteases involved. Further experi￾mental evidence in a mouse model suggests that ocular surface
inflammation can outlast exposure to DES and may be able to
perpetuate the clinical features of the disease. The potential
dissociation between cause and effect may explain in part the
discrepancy between some objective signs and patient symptoms
reported in the literature.
For any cause of DED, tear hyperosmolarity is initiated by either
or both of two mechanisms. In ADDE there is a deficient lacrimal
secretion but a normal rate of evaporation from a tear film of
reduced volume. In EDE hyperosmolarity results from an excessive
evaporation of tears in the presence of normal lacrimal function.
Since all forms of DED are due to water loss from the tear film, the
precipitation of hyperosmolarity at the ocular surface is strongly
influenced by environment, including ambient humidity, airflow
and temperature and also blink interval, lid aperture and globe
prominence. Unfavourable conditions may either trigger the onset
of DED or exacerbate its severity. The effect of environment is
brought out by the newly described condition of SBUDE observed in
Japanese office workers. The ergonomic and environmental factors
that precipitate this form of DED require further study.
It is evident that many hybrid forms of DED exist in which
lacrimal deficiency and increased evaporative loss collaborate to
cause enhanced ocular surface hyperosmolarity. These are sum￾marised in Table 13. Such hybrid states should be recognised in the
inclusion criteria of clinical trials and in subgroup analyses of
outcomes. Once a dry eye is of sufficient severity to cause tear
breakup within the interblink interval, an additional evaporative
component will be added to any form of DED, so that any ADDE will
acquire an evaporative component and the evaporative basis of an
existing EDE will be amplified. Studies which test this prediction by
comparing the ocular protection index with evaporation rate and
tear osmolarity would be of value.
This hybrid state should not obscure the initiating mechanism of
the DED. It is predicted that tear levels of the lacrimal proteins,
lysozyme, lactoferrin and peroxidase will remain normal where the
initiating cause is EDE but will be reduced where it is ADDE, due to
lacrimal acinar destruction. This hypothesis should be tested in the
field. A revised language is required to accommodate these and
other forms of hybrid DED.
A variety of animal models of DED exist, which address several
of the pathophysiological mechanisms responsible for DED
including lacrimal gland insufficiency, MGD, impairment of the
innervation, humoral mechanisms and environmental stress. Ge￾netic manipulation has been used to explore the factors influencing
susceptibility. Study of these factors provides hypothesis￾generating insights into the causes of human DED and, since do￾mestic animals may suffer from spontaneous, autoimmune DED,
the findings are of veterinary as well as human clinical interest.
They also provide an opportunity for toxicological and pharmaco￾kinetic study of potentially sight-saving new drugs.
Murine models of DES and SCP permit the evolution of DED to
be timed from its initiation. A constellation of cytokines and che￾mokines has been identified in these models to cause damage to
the ocular surface, with differences in outcome varying according
to the experimental model.
Models of autoimmune DED simulating Sjogren syndrome are €
dependent on genetic susceptibility. In various models, the influ￾ence of autoreactive T cells, of disrupting TGF-b signaling or the Fas￾Fas ligand system, of inducing glandular apoptosis, of manipulating
sex hormones, and of generating autoantibodies encountered in
human disease, has been explored. In the majority of these models
the diseases evolve spontaneously over time and reaching varying
levels of severity. In contrast to the DES and SCP models, the specific
trigger for the onset of disease is not known. Therefore, those
models in which DES is administered to genetically modified ani￾mals are of particular interest in bridging the gap in knowledge
between initiation and susceptibility in different model systems.
The role of genetic susceptibility in human, age-related NSDE has
not yet been adequately explored.
Both aged and chronic models of DED have been developed,
with sex differences in severity, including corneal damage (C57BL/
6) and goblet cell density (MRL.lpr.B6), which are of great interest in
relation to human disease. T helper cell (Th1 and Th2) cytokines
have been shown to have opposing effects on conjunctival goblet
cell development and maintenance. The Th2 cytokine IL-13 induces
goblet cell differentiation and mucus production and the Th1
cytokine IFN-g causes goblet cell loss in a DES model of DED. In
some models a sex bias for sialoadenitis versus dacryoadentis has
been shown.
This Subcommittee has taken some trouble to compare and
contrast the clinical and pathological features of Sjogren syndrome €
as it affects the lacrimal and salivary glands. More work can be done
at a number of levels. Fresh lacrimal tissue is scarce, but an op￾portunity should be taken to establish post-mortem banks of
lacrimal and salivary gland tissues for research purposes, obtained
from patients with well-characterized Sjogren syndrome and €
NSDE.
The potential role of viral triggers of Sjogren syndrome, in €
genetically disposed individuals, should be explored further. When
exposure and infection are as common as is the case for the Epstein
Barr virus, this task may at first seem disheartening, but stored
blood data is potentially available for large numbers of exposed and
unexposed individuals and has been used epidemiologically to
study the role of EBV as a risk factor for multiple sclerosis and SLE
[1099-1101]. This approach should be harnessed for the study of
Sjogren syndrome. €
Acknowledgments
The Subcommittee wish to acknowledge the help of Jutta
Horwath-Winter for reviewing key aspects of this report, to Barbara
Caffery, Donald Korb and Tannin Schmidt for contributions to the
sections on Sjogren Syndrome, blinking, and frictional forces, and €
to Maria Markoulli and Driss Zoukhri for their dedicated work in
preparation of the manuscript.
References
[1] Report of the international dry eye workshop (DEWS). Ocul Surf 2007;5:
65e204.
[2] Dean C, Ito M, Makarenkova HP, Faber SC, Lang RA. Bmp7 regulates
branching morphogenesis of the lacrimal gland by promoting mesenchymal
proliferation and condensation. Development 2004;131:4155e65.
[3] Makarenkova HP, Ito M, Govindarajan V, Faber SC, Sun L, McMahon G, et al.
FGF10 is an inducer and Pax6 a competence factor for lacrimal gland
development. Development 2000;127:2563e72.
[4] Grishina I, Lattes B. A novel Cdk2 interactor is phosphorylated by Cdc7 and
associates with components of the replication complexes. Cell Cycle 2005;4:
1120e6.
[5] Fernandez-Valencia R, Gomez Pellico L. Functional anatomy of the human
saccus lacrimalis. Acta Anat 1990;139:54e9.
[6] Bron AJ. Lacrimal streams: the demonstration of human lacrimal fluid
secretion and the lacrimal ductules. Br J Ophthalmol 1986;70:241e5.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 489
[7] Seifert P, Spitznas M, Koch F, Cusumano A. The architecture of human
accessory lacrimal glands. Ger J Ophthalmol 1993;2:444e54.
[8] Bergmanson JP, Doughty MJ, Blocker Y. The acinar and ductal organisation of
the tarsal accessory lacrimal gland of Wolfring in rabbit eyelid. Exp Eye Res
1999;68:411e21.
[9] Allansmith MR, Kajiyama G, Abelson MB, Simon MA. Plasma cell content of
main and accessory lacrimal glands and conjunctiva. Am J Ophthalmol
1976;82:819e26.
[10] Seifert P, Spitznas M. Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) innervation of
the human eyelid glands. Exp Eye Res 1999;68:685e92.
[11] Wieczorek R, Jakobiec FA, Sacks EH, Knowles DM. The immunoarchitecture
of the normal human lacrimal gland. Relevancy for understanding pathologic
conditions. Ophthalmology 1988;95:100e9.
[12] Dartt DA. Regulation of tear secretion. Adv Exp Med Biol 1994;350:1e9.
[13] Dartt DA. Neural regulation of lacrimal gland secretory processes: relevance
in dry eye diseases. Prog Retin Eye Res 2009;28:155e77.
[14] Knop E, Knop N. The role of eye-associated lymphoid tissue in corneal im￾mune protection. J Anat 2005;206:271e85.
[15] Dartt DA. Signal transduction and control of lacrimal gland protein secretion:
a review. Curr Eye Res 1989;8:619e36.
[16] Jager K, Wu G, Sel S, Garreis F, Brauer L, Paulsen FP. MUC16 in the lacrimal
apparatus. Histochem Cell Biol 2007;127:433e8.
[17] Jumblatt MM, McKenzie RW, Steele PS, Emberts CG, Jumblatt JE. MUC7
expression in the human lacrimal gland and conjunctiva. Cornea 2003;22:
41e5.
[18] Paulsen F, Langer G, Hoffmann W, Berry M. Human lacrimal gland mucins.
Cell Tissue Res 2004;316:167e77.
[19] Mircheff AK. Lacrimal gland fluid and electrolyte secretion: a review. Curr
Eye Res 1989;8:607e17.
[20] Mircheff AK. Water and electrolyte secretion and fluid modification. In:
Albert D, Jakobiec F, editors. Principles and Practice of Ophthalmology: Basic
Sciences. Philadelphia: WB Sanders Company; 1994. p. 466e72.
[21] Makarenkova HP, Dartt DA. Myoepithelial cells: their origin and function in
lacrimal gland morphogenesis, homeostasis, and repair. Curr Mol Biol Rep
2015;1:115e23.
[22] Leeson TS, Leeson CR. Myoepithelial cells in the exorbital lacrimal and pa￾rotid glands of the rat in frozen-etched replicas. Am J Anat 1971;132:
133e45.
[23] Botelho SY. Tears and the lacrimal gland. Sci Am 1964;211:78e86.
[24] Sibony PA, Walcott B, McKeon C, Jakobiec FA. Vasoactive intestinal poly￾peptide and the innervation of the human lacrimal gland. Arch Ophthalmol
1988;106:1085e8.
[25] Hodges RR, Dartt DA. Regulatory pathways in lacrimal gland epithelium. Int
Rev Cytol 2003;231:129e96.
[26] Gupta A, Heigle T, Pflugfelder SC. Nasolacrimal stimulation of aqueous tear
production. Cornea 1997;16:645e8.
[27] Berthong M. Pathologic changes secondary to radiation. World J Surg
1986;10:155e70.
[28] Ackermann P, Hetz S, Dieckow J, Schicht M, Richter A, Kruse C, et al. Isolation
and investigation of presumptive murine lacrimal gland stem cells. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:4350e63.
[29] Shatos MA, Haugaard-Kedstrom L, Hodges RR, Dartt DA. Isolation and
characterization of progenitor cells in uninjured, adult rat lacrimal gland.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:2749e59.
[30] Zoukhri D. Mechanisms involved in injury and repair of the murine lacrimal
gland: role of programmed cell death and mesenchymal stem cells. Ocul Surf
2010;8:60e9.
[31] Zoukhri D, Fix A, Alroy J, Kublin CL. Mechanisms of murine lacrimal gland
repair after experimentally induced inflammation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2008;49:4399e406.
[32] Zoukhri D. Effect of inflammation on lacrimal gland function. Exp Eye Res
2006;82:885e98.
[33] Thiery JP, Acloque H, Huang RY, Nieto MA. Epithelial-mesenchymal transi￾tions in development and disease. Cell 2009;139:871e90.
[34] Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A, Zhou AY, et al. The epithelial￾mesenchymal transition generates cells with properties of stem cells. Cell
2008;133:704e15.
[35] You S, Avidan O, Tariq A, Ahluwalia I, Stark PC, Kublin CL, et al. Role of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in repair of the lacrimal gland after
experimentally induced injury. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:126e35.
[36] Knop E, Knop N, Millar T, Obata H, Sullivan DA. The international workshop
on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of the subcommittee on anatomy,
physiology, and pathophysiology of the meibomian gland. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:1938e78.
[37] Foulks GN, Bron AJ. Meibomian gland dysfunction: a clinical scheme for
description, diagnosis, classification, and grading. Ocul Surf 2003;1:107e26.
[38] Andersen H, Ehlers N, Matthiessen ME. Histochemistry and development of
the human eyelids. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1965;43:642e68.
[39] Jester JV, Nicolaides N, Kiss-Palvolgyi I, Smith RE. Meibomian gland
dysfunction. II. The role of keratinization in a rabbit model of MGD. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1989;30:936e45.
[40] Knop E, Knop N, Zhivov A, Kraak R, Korb DR, Blackie C, et al. The lid wiper
and muco-cutaneous junction anatomy of the human eyelid margins: an in
vivo confocal and histological study. J Anat 2011;218:449e61.
[41] Cox SM, Nichols JJ. The neurobiology of the meibomian glands. Ocul Surf
2014;12:167e77.
[42] Kam WR, Sullivan DA. Neurotransmitter influence on human meibomian
gland epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:8543e8.
[43] Sullivan DA, Liu Y, Kam WR, Ding J, Green KM, Shaffer SA, et al. Serum￾induced differentiation of human meibomian gland epithelial cells. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:3866e77.
[44] Schirra F, Suzuki T, Richards SM, Jensen RV, Liu M, Lombardi MJ, et al.
Androgen control of gene expression in the mouse meibomian gland. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:3666e75.
[45] Ding J, Kam WR, Dieckow J, Sullivan DA. The influence of 13-cis retinoic acid
on human meibomian gland epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2013;54:4341e50.
[46] Ding J, Liu Y, Sullivan DA. Effects of insulin and high glucose on human
meibomian gland epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:
7814e20.
[47] Ding J, Sullivan DA. The effects of insulin-like growth factor 1 and growth
hormone on human meibomian gland epithelial cells. JAMA Ophthalmol
2014;132:593e9.
[48] Gidfar S, Afsharkhamseh N, Sanjari S, Djalilian AR. Notch signaling in mei￾bomian gland epithelial cell differentiation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2016;57:859e65.
[49] Khandelwal P, Liu S, Sullivan DA. Androgen regulation of gene expression in
human meibomian gland and conjunctival epithelial cells. Mol Vis 2012;18:
1055e67.
[50] Liu S, Hatton MP, Khandelwal P, Sullivan DA. Culture, immortalization, and
characterization of human meibomian gland epithelial cells. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2010;51:3993e4005.
[51] Liu S, Kam WR, Ding J, Hatton MP, Sullivan DA. Effect of growth factors on the
proliferation and gene expression of human meibomian gland epithelial
cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:2541e50.
[52] Liu Y, Ding J. The combined effect of azithromycin and insulin-like growth
factor-1 on cultured human meibomian gland epithelial cells. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:5596e601.
[53] Liu Y, Kam WR, Ding J, Sullivan DA. Can tetracycline antibiotics duplicate the
ability of azithromycin to stimulate human meibomian gland epithelial cell
differentiation? Cornea 2015;34:342e6.
[54] Liu Y, Kam WR, Ding J, Sullivan DA. Effect of azithromycin on lipid accu￾mulation in immortalized human meibomian gland epithelial cells. JAMA
Ophthalmol 2014;132:226e8.
[55] Liu Y, Kam WR, Ding J, Sullivan DA. One man's poison is another man's meat:
using azithromycin-induced phospholipidosis to promote ocular surface
health. Toxicology 2014;320:1e5.
[56] Liu Y, Kam WR, Sullivan DA. Influence of omega 3 and 6 fatty acids on human
meibomian gland epithelial cells. Cornea 2016;35:1122e6.
[57] Liu Y, Knop E, Knop N, Sullivan DA, List EO, Kopchick JJ, et al. Growth hor￾mone influence on the morphology and size of the mouse meibomian gland.
J Ophthalmol 2016;2016:5728071.
[58] Liu Y, Kam WR, Fernandes P, Sullivan DA. The effect of solithromycin, a
cationic amphiphilic drug, on the proliferation and differentiation of human
meibomian gland epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2017. ARVO
abstract #4379.
[59] Kam W, Sullivan D. Suppressive effects of 17b-estradiol on immortalized
human meibomian gland epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013.
ARVO e-abstract #4316.
[60] Sahin A, Kam WR, Darabad RR, Topilow K, S DA. Regulation of leukotriene B4
secretion by human corneal, conjunctival, and meibomian gland epithelial
cells. Arch Ophthalmol 2012;130:1013e8.
[61] Zhang Y, Kam WR, Liu Y, Chen X, Sullivan DA. Influence of pilocarpine and
timolol on human meibomian gland epithelial cells. Cornea 2017;36:
719e24.
[62] Kam W, Sullivan DA, Sullivan BD, Venkiteshwar. Does hyperosmolarity
induce an irreversible process leading to human corneal epithelial cell
death? Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2016. ARVO Abstract #6161.
[63] Zhang SD, He JN, Niu TT, et al. Bacteriological profile of ocular surface flora in
meibomian gland dysfunction. Ocul Surf 2017;15:242e7.
[64] Butovich IA. Lipidomic analysis of human meibum using HPLC-MSn.
Methods Mol Biol 2009;579:221e46.
[65] Brown SH, Kunnen CM, Papas EB, Lazon de la Jara P, Willcox MD, Blanksby SJ,
et al. Intersubject and Interday variability in human tear and meibum lip￾idomes: a pilot study. Ocul Surf 2016;14:43e8.
[66] Brown SH, Kunnen CM, Duchoslav E, Dolla NK, Kelso MJ, Papas EB, et al. A
comparison of patient matched meibum and tear lipidomes. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:7417e24.
[67] Berg JM, Tymoczko JL, Stryer L. Biochemistry. fifth ed. New York: W. H.
Freeman and Co; 2002.
[68] Schirra F, Suzuki T, Dickinson DP, Townsend DJ, Gipson IK, Sullivan DA.
Identification of steroidogenic enzyme mRNAs in the human lacrimal gland,
meibomian gland, cornea, and conjunctiva. Cornea 2006;25:438e42.
[69] Schirra F, Richards SM, Liu M, Suzuki T, Yamagami H, Sullivan DA. Androgen
regulation of lipogenic pathways in the mouse meibomian gland. Exp Eye
Res 2006;83:291e6.
[70] Rawson RB. The site-2 protease. Biochim Biophys Acta 2013;1828:2801e7.
[71] Horton JD, Shah NA, Warrington JA, Anderson NN, Park SW, Brown MS, et al.
Combined analysis of oligonucleotide microarray data from transgenic and
knockout mice identifies direct SREBP target genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 490
2003;100:12027e32.
[72] Swinnen JV, Heemers H, van de Sande T, de Schrijver E, Brusselmans K,
Heyns W, et al. Androgens, lipogenesis and prostate cancer. J Steroid Bio￾chem Mol Biol 2004;92:273e9.
[73] Megarbane H, Megarbane A. Ichthyosis follicularis, alopecia, and photo￾phobia (IFAP) syndrome. Orphanet J Rare Dis 2011;6:29.
[74] Bron AJ, Tripathi RC, Tripathi B, et al. Wolff's Anatomy of the Eye and Orbit.
London: Chapman and Hall; 1997.
[75] Knop E, Knop N, Zhivov A, Kraak R, Korb DR, Blackie C, et al. The lid wiper
and muco-cutaneous junction anatomy of the human eyelid margins: an in
vivo confocal and histological study. J Anat 2011;218:449e61.
[76] Wolff E. Anatomy of the Eye and Orbit. London: Lewis and Co; 1946.
[77] (a) Bron AJ. The Doyne lecture. Reflections on the tears. Eye (Lond)
1997;11(Pt 5):583e602.
(b) Bron AJ, Tripathi RC, Tripathi B. Wolff's Anatomy of the Eye and Orbit.
London: Chapman and Hall; 1997.
[78] Mantelli F, Massaro-Giordano M, Macchi I, Lambiase A, Bonini S. The cellular
mechanisms of dry eye: from pathogenesis to treatment. J Cell Physiol
2013;228:2253e6.
[79] (a) Bron AJ, Argueso P, Irkec M, Bright FV. Clinical staining of the ocular
surface: mechanisms and interpretations. Prog Retin Eye Res 2015;44:
36e61.
(b) Bron AJ. The definition and classification of dry eye disease. In: Chan C,
editor. Dry Eye: A Practical Approach. Springer; 2015.
[80] Pellegrini G, Golisano O, Paterna P, Lambiase A, Bonini S, Rama P, et al.
Location and clonal analysis of stem cells and their differentiated progeny in
the human ocular surface. J Cell Biol 1999;145:769e82.
[81] Dartt DA. Regulation of mucin and fluid secretion by conjunctival epithelial
cells. Prog Retin Eye Res 2002;21:555e76.
[82] Schmidt TA, Sullivan DA, Knop E, Richards SM, Knop N, Liu S, et al. Tran￾scription, translation, and function of lubricin, a boundary lubricant, at the
ocular surface. JAMA Ophthalmol 2013;131:766e76.
[83] Argueso P, Gipson IK. Epithelial mucins of the ocular surface: structure,
biosynthesis and function. Exp Eye Res 2001;73:281e9.
[84] Levin MH, Verkman AS. Aquaporin-dependent water permeation at the
mouse ocular surface: in vivo microfluorimetric measurements in cornea
and conjunctiva. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45:4423e32.
[85] Knop E, Knop N, Claus P. Local production of secretory IgA in the eye-asso￾ciated lymphoid tissue (EALT) of the normal human ocular surface. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:2322e9.
[86] Barrandon Y. The biology of epidermal stem cells. Ann Dermatol Venereol
1998;125(Suppl 2):S5e6.
[87] Lajtha LG. Stem cell concepts. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol 1979;21:59e65.
[88] Dua HS, Miri A, Alomar T, Yeung AM, Said DG. The role of limbal stem cells in
corneal epithelial maintenance: testing the dogma. Ophthalmology
2009;116:856e63.
[89] Dziasko MA, Daniels JT. Anatomical features and cell-cell interactions in the
human limbal epithelial stem cell niche. Ocul Surf 2016;14:322e30.
[90] Ramos T, Scott D, Ahmad S. An update on ocular surface epithelial stem cells:
cornea and conjunctiva. Stem Cells Int 2015;2015:601731.
[91] Tseng SC, He H, Zhang S, Chen SY. Niche regulation of limbal epithelial stem
cells: relationship between inflammation and regeneration. Ocul Surf
2016;14:100e12.
[92] Wei ZG, Sun TT, Lavker RM. Rabbit conjunctival and corneal epithelial cells
belong to two separate lineages. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1996;37:523e33.
[93] Wei ZG, Wu RL, Lavker RM, Sun TT. In vitro growth and differentiation of
rabbit bulbar, fornix, and palpebral conjunctival epithelia. Implications on
conjunctival epithelial transdifferentiation and stem cells. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 1993;34:1814e28.
[94] Pe'er J, Zajicek G, Greifner H, Kogan M. Streaming conjunctiva. Anat Rec
1996;245:36e40.
[95] Wirtschafter JD, Ketcham JM, Weinstock RJ, Tabesh T, McLoon LK. Mucocu￾taneous junction as the major source of replacement palpebral conjunctival
epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1999;40:3138e46.
[96] Stewart RM, Sheridan CM, Hiscott PS, Czanner G, Kaye SB. Human
conjunctival stem cells are predominantly located in the medial canthal and
inferior Forniceal areas. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:2021e30.
[97] Kessing SV. Mucous gland system of the conjunctiva. A quantitative normal
anatomical study. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1968;(Suppl 95):91þ.
[98] Perez-Vilar J, Hill RL. The structure and assembly of secreted mucins. J Biol
Chem 1999;274:31751e4.
[99] Gipson IK. Distribution of mucins at the ocular surface. Exp Eye Res 2004;78:
379e88.
[100] Mantelli F, Argueso P. Functions of ocular surface mucins in health and
disease. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2008;8:477e83.
[101] Knop N, Korb DR, Blackie CA, Knop E. The lid wiper contains goblet cells and
goblet cell crypts for ocular surface lubrication during the blink. Cornea
2012;31:668e79.
[102] Knop N, Knop E. The crypt system of the human conjunctiva. Adv Exp Med
Biol 2002;506:867e72.
[103] Gordon YJ, Romanowski EG, McDermott AM. A review of antimicrobial
peptides and their therapeutic potential as anti-infective drugs. Curr Eye Res
2005;30:505e15.
[104] Knop E, Korb DR, Blackie CA, Knop N. The lid margin is an underestimated
structure for preservation of ocular surface health and development of dry
eye disease. Dev Ophthalmol 2010;45:108e22.
[105] De Paiva CS, Raince JK, McClellan AJ, Shanmugam KP, Pangelinan SB,
Volpe EA, et al. Homeostatic control of conjunctival mucosal goblet cells by
NKT-derived IL-13. Mucosal Immunol 2011;4:397e408.
[106] Diebold Y, Rios JD, Hodges RR, Rawe I, Dartt DA. Presence of nerves and their
receptors in mouse and human conjunctival goblet cells. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2001;42:2270e82.
[107] Rios JD, Forde K, Diebold Y, Lightman J, Zieske JD, Dartt DA. Development of
conjunctival goblet cells and their neuroreceptor subtype expression. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:2127e37.
[108] Rios JD, Zoukhri D, Rawe IM, Hodges RR, Zieske JD, Dartt DA. Immunoloc￾alization of muscarinic and VIP receptor subtypes and their role in stimu￾lating goblet cell secretion. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1999;40:1102e11.
[109] Dartt DA, Kessler TL, Chung EH, Zieske JD. Vasoactive intestinal peptide￾stimulated glycoconjugate secretion from conjunctival goblet cells. Exp Eye
Res 1996;63:27e34.
[110] Hodges RR, Bair JA, Carozza RB, Li D, Shatos MA, Dartt DA. Signaling path￾ways used by EGF to stimulate conjunctival goblet cell secretion. Exp Eye Res
2012;103:99e113.
[111] Fujihara T, Murakami T, Fujita H, Nakamura M, Nakata K. Improvement of
corneal barrier function by the P2Y(2) agonist INS365 in a rat dry eye model.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:96e100.
[112] Jumblatt JE, Jumblatt MM. Regulation of ocular mucin secretion by P2Y2
nucleotide receptors in rabbit and human conjunctiva. Exp Eye Res 1998;67:
341e6.
[113] Rios JD, Ghinelli E, Gu J, Hodges RR, Dartt DA. Role of neurotrophins and
neurotrophin receptors in rat conjunctival goblet cell secretion and prolif￾eration. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48:1543e51.
[114] Hingorani M, Metz D, Lightman SL. Characterisation of the normal
conjunctival leukocyte population. Exp Eye Res 1997;64:905e12.
[115] Allansmith MR, Greiner JV, Baird RS. Number of inflammatory cells in the
normal conjunctiva. Am J Ophthalmol 1978;86:250e9.
[116] Allansmith M, de Ramus A, Maurice D. The dynamics of IgG in the cornea.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1979;18:947e55.
[117] Knop N, Knop E. Conjunctiva-associated lymphoid tissue in the human eye.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:1270e9.
[118] Knop E, Knop N. Conjunctiva-associated lymphoid tissue (CALT) in the hu￾man eye e components and topographical distribution. Ophthalmic Res
1999;31(Suppl.):156.
[119] Knop E, Knop N. A functional unit for ocular surface immune defense formed
by the lacrimal gland, conjunctivaand lacrimal drainage system. Adv Exp
Med Biol 2002;506:835e44.
[120] Dua HS, Gomes JA, Jindal VK, Appa SN, Schwarting R, Eagle Jr RC, et al.
Mucosa specific lymphocytes in the human conjunctiva, corneoscleral
limbus and lacrimal gland. Curr Eye Res 1994;13:87e93.
[121] Wotherspoon AC, Hardman-Lea S, Isaacson PG. Mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue (MALT) in the human conjunctiva. J Pathol 1994;174:33e7.
[122] Nichols B, Dawson CR, Togni B. Surface features of the conjunctiva and
cornea. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1983;24:570e6.
[123] Cope C, Dilly PN, Kaura R, Tiffany JM. Wettability of the corneal surface: a
reappraisal. Curr Eye Res 1986;5:777e85.
[124] Gipson IK, Argueso P. Role of mucins in the function of the corneal and
conjunctival epithelia. Int Rev Cytol 2003;231:1e49.
[125] Liotet S, Van Bijsterveld OP, Kogbe O, Laroche L. A new hypothesis on tear
film stability. Ophthalmologica 1987;195:119e24.
[126] Pult H, et al. Spontaneous blinking from a tribological viewpoint. Ocul Surf
2015;13(3):236e49.
[127] Sumiyoshi M, Ricciuto J, Tisdale A, Gipson IK, Mantelli F, Argueso P. Anti￾adhesive character of mucin O-glycans at the apical surface of corneal
epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:197e203.
[128] Blalock TD, Spurr-Michaud SJ, Tisdale AS, Heimer SR, Gilmore MS, Ramesh V,
et al. Functions of MUC16 in corneal epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2007;48:4509e18.
[129] Ricciuto J, Heimer SR, Gilmore MS, Argueso P. Cell surface O-glycans limit
Staphylococcus aureus adherence to corneal epithelial cells. Infect Immun
2008;76:5215e20.
[130] Govindarajan B, Gipson IK. Membrane-tethered mucins have multiple
functions on the ocular surface. Exp Eye Res 2010;90:655e63.
[131] Inatomi T, Spurr-Michaud S, Tisdale AS, Gipson IK. Human corneal and
conjunctival epithelia express MUC1 mucin. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
1995;36:1818e27.
[132] Inatomi T, Spurr-Michaud S, Tisdale AS, Zhan Q, Feldman ST, Gipson IK.
Expression of secretory mucin genes by human conjunctival epithelia. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1996;37:1684e92.
[133] Argueso P, Spurr-Michaud S, Russo CL, Tisdale A, Gipson IK. MUC16 mucin is
expressed by the human ocular surface epithelia and carries the H185 car￾bohydrate epitope. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:2487e95.
[134] Argueso P, Guzman-Aranguez A, Mantelli F, Cao Z, Ricciuto J, Panjwani N.
Association of cell surface mucins with galectin-3 contributes to the ocular
surface epithelial barrier. J Biol Chem 2009;284:23037e45.
[135] Moniaux N, Escande F, Porchet N, Aubert JP, Batra SK. Structural organization
and classification of the human mucin genes. Front Biosci 2001;6:
D1192e206.
[136] Yin BW, Lloyd KO. Molecular cloning of the CA125 ovarian cancer antigen:
identification as a new mucin, MUC16. J Biol Chem 2001;276:27371e5.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 491
[137] Komatsu M, Yee L, Carraway KL. Overexpression of sialomucin complex, a rat
homologue of MUC4, inhibits tumor killing by lymphokine-activated killer
cells. Cancer Res 1999;59:2229e36.
[138] Carraway KL, Hull SR. Cell surface mucin-type glycoproteins and mucin-like
domains. Glycobiology 1991;1:131e8.
[139] Hattrup CL, Gendler SJ. Structure and function of the cell surface (tethered)
mucins. Annu Rev Physiol 2008;70:431e57.
[140] Hilkens J, Vos HL, Wesseling J, Boer M, Storm J, van der Valk S, et al. Is
episialin/MUC1 involved in breast cancer progression? Cancer Lett 1995;90:
27e33.
[141] Wesseling J, van der Valk SW, Vos HL, Sonnenberg A, Hilkens J. Episialin
(MUC1) overexpression inhibits integrin-mediated cell adhesion to extra￾cellular matrix components. J Cell Biol 1995;129:255e65.
[142] Cascio S, Zhang L, Finn OJ. MUC1 protein expression in tumor cells regulates
transcription of proinflammatory cytokines by forming a complex with nu￾clear factor-kappaB p65 and binding to cytokine promoters: importance of
extracellular domain. J Biol Chem 2011;286:42248e56.
[143] Roy LD, Sahraei M, Subramani DB, Besmer D, Nath S, Tinder TL, et al. MUC1
enhances invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells by inducing epithelial to
mesenchymal transition. Oncogene 2011;30:1449e59.
[144] Pflugfelder SC, Liu Z, Monroy D, Li DQ, Carvajal ME, Price-Schiavi SA, et al.
Detection of sialomucin complex (MUC4) in human ocular surface epithe￾lium and tear fluid. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:1316e26.
[145] O'Brien TJ, Beard JB, Underwood LJ, Dennis RA, Santin AD, York L. The CA 125
gene: an extracellular superstructure dominated by repeat sequences.
Tumour Biol 2001;22:348e66.
[146] O'Brien TJ, Beard JB, Underwood LJ, Shigemasa K. The CA 125 gene: a newly
discovered extension of the glycosylated N-terminal domain doubles the
size of this extracellular superstructure. Tumour Biol 2002;23:154e69.
[147] Gipson IK, Spurr-Michaud S, Tisdale A, Menon BB. Comparison of the
transmembrane mucins MUC1 and MUC16 in epithelial barrier function.
PLoS One 2014;9. e100393.
[148] Argueso P, Tisdale A, Spurr-Michaud S, Sumiyoshi M, Gipson IK. Mucin
characteristics of human corneal-limbal epithelial cells that exclude the rose
bengal anionic dye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:113e9.
[149] (a) Gipson IK, et al. Comparison of the transmembrane mucins MUC1 and
MUC16 in epithelial barrier function. PLoS One 2014;9(6):e100393.
(b) Arafat SN, Suelves AM, Spurr-Michaud S, Chodosh J, Foster CS,
Dohlman CH, et al. Neutrophil collagenase, gelatinase, and myeloperoxidase
in tears of patients with Stevens-Johnson syndrome and ocular cicatricial
pemphigoid. Ophthalmology 2014;121:79e87.
[150] Mantelli F, Schaffer L, Dana R, Head SR, Argueso P. Glycogene expression in
conjunctiva of patients with dry eye: downregulation of Notch signaling.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;50:2666e72.
[151] Ahmad N, Gabius HJ, Andre S, Kaltner H, Sabesan S, Roy R, et al. Galectin-3
precipitates as a pentamer with synthetic multivalent carbohydrates and
forms heterogeneous cross-linked complexes. J Biol Chem 2004;279:
10841e7.
[152] Barondes SH, Castronovo V, Cooper DN, Cummings RD, Drickamer K, Feizi T,
et al. Galectins: a family of animal beta-galactoside-binding lectins. Cell
1994;76:597e8.
[153] Rabinovich GA, Toscano MA, Jackson SS, Vasta GR. Functions of cell surface
galectin-glycoprotein lattices. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2007;17:513e20.
[154] Argueso P. Glycobiology of the ocular surface: mucins and lectins. Jpn J
Ophthalmol 2013;57:150e5.
[155] Uchino Y, Mauris J, Woodward AM, Dieckow J, Amparo F, Dana R, et al.
Alteration of galectin-3 in tears of patients with dry eye disease. Am J
Ophthalmol 2015;159:1027e35. e1023.
[156] Jumblatt MM, McKenzie RW, Jumblatt JE. MUC5AC mucin is a component of
the human precorneal tear film. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1999;40:43e9.
[157] McKenzie RW, Jumblatt JE, Jumblatt MM. Quantification of MUC2 and
MUC5AC transcripts in human conjunctiva. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2000;41:703e8.
[158] Corrales RM, Galarreta D, Herreras JM, Saez V, Arranz I, Gonzalez MJ, et al.
Conjunctival mucin mRNA expression in contact lens wear. Optom Vis Sci
2009;86:1051e8.
[159] Spurr-Michaud S, Argueso P, Gipson I. Assay of mucins in human tear fluid.
Exp Eye Res 2007;84:939e50.
[160] Woodward AM, Argueso P. Expression analysis of the transmembrane mucin
MUC20 in human corneal and conjunctival epithelia. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2014;55:6132e8.
[161] Gaffney EA, et al. A mass and solute balance model for tear volume and
osmolarity in the normal and the dry eye. Prog Retin Eye Res 2010;29(1):
59e78.
[162] King-Smith PE, Fink BA, Fogt N, Nichols KK, Hill RM, Wilson GS. The thick￾ness of the human precorneal tear film: evidence from reflection spectra.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:3348e59.
[163] Bron AJ, Yokoi N, Gaffney EA, Tiffany JM. A solute gradient in the tear
meniscus. I. A hypothesis to explain Marx's line. Ocul Surf 2011;9:70e91.
[164] McDonald JE. Surface phenomena of the tear film. Am J Ophthalmol 1969;67:
56e64.
[165] (a) Yokoi N, Bron AJ, Georgiev GA. The precorneal tear film as a fluid shell:
the effect of blinking and saccades on tear film distribution and dynamics.
Ocul Surf 2014;12:252e66.
(b) Yokoi N, Uchino M, Uchino Y, Dogru M, Kawashima M, Komuro A, et al.
Importance of tear film instability in dry eye disease in office workers using
visual display terminals: the Osaka study. Am J Ophthalmol 2015;159:
748e54.
[166] Bron AJ, Yokoi N, Yang Z, Georgiev GA. The pre-corneal fluid shell. What is
the effect of drop instillation? Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;2015. ARVO
poster, Abstract 2496.
[167] Doane MG. Dynamics of the human blink. Ber Zusammenkunft Dtsch Oph￾thalmol Ges 1979:13e7.
[168] Yokoi N, Kinoshita S, Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Sugita J, Inatomi T. Tear meniscus
changes during cotton thread and Schirmer testing. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2000;41:3748e53.
[169] Yokoi N, Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Maruyama K, Komuro A, Kinoshita S. Rela￾tionship between tear volume and tear meniscus curvature. Arch Oph￾thalmol 2004;122:1265e9.
[170] Mishima S, Gasset A, Klyce Jr SD, Baum JL. Determination of tear volume and
tear flow. Invest Ophthalmol 1966;5:264e76.
[171] Mainstone JC, Bruce AS, Golding TR. Tear meniscus measurement in the
diagnosis of dry eye. Curr Eye Res 1996;15:653e61.
[172] Shen M, Li J, Wang J, Ma H, Cai C, Tao A, et al. Upper and lower tear menisci in
the diagnosis of dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;50:2722e6.
[173] Mishima S. Some physiological aspects of the precorneal tear film. Arch
Ophthalmol 1965;73:233e41.
[174] Tomlinson A, Doane MG, McFadyen A. Inputs and outputs of the lacrimal
system: review of production and evaporative loss. Ocul Surf 2009;7:
186e98.
[175] Craig JP, Tomlinson A. Importance of the lipid layer in human tear film
stability and evaporation. Optom Vis Sci 1997;74:8e13.
[176] Gaffney EA, Tiffany JM, Yokoi N, Bron AJ. A mass and solute balance model for
tear volume and osmolarity in the normal and the dry eye. Prog Retin Eye
Res 2010;29:59e78.
[177] Nichols JJ, Mitchell GL, King-Smith PE. Thinning rate of the precorneal and
prelens tear films. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:2353e61.
[178] Yokoi N, Bron AJ, Georgiev GA. The precorneal tear film as a fluid shell: the
effect of blinking and saccades on tear film distribution and dynamics. Ocul
Surf 2014;12:252e66.
[179] King-Smith PE, Hinel EA, Nichols JJ. Application of a novel interferometric
method to investigate the relation between lipid layer thickness and tear
film thinning. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51:2418e23.
[180] Bron AJ, Tiffany JM. The contribution of meibomian disease to dry eye. Ocul
Surf 2004;2:149e65.
[181] Tiffany JM. The lipid secretion of the meibomian glands. Adv Lipid Res
1987;22:1e62.
[182] Georgiev GA, Yokoi N, Ivanova S, Tonchev V, Nencheva Y, Krastev R. Surface
relaxations as a tool to distinguish the dynamic interfacial properties of films
formed by normal and diseased meibomian lipids. Soft Matter 2014;10:
5579e88.
[183] Butovich IA, Lu H, McMahon A, Ketelson H, Senchyna M, Meadows D, et al.
Biophysical and morphological evaluation of human normal and dry eye
meibum using hot stage polarized light microscopy. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2014;55:87e101.
[184] Blackie CA, Korb DR, Knop E, Bedi R, Knop N, Holland EJ. Nonobvious
obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction. Cornea 2010;29:1333e45.
[185] Chew CK, Hykin PG, Jansweijer C, Dikstein S, Tiffany JM, Bron AJ. The casual
level of meibomian lipids in humans. Curr Eye Res 1993;12:255e9.
[186] Chew CK, Jansweijer C, Tiffany JM, Dikstein S, Bron AJ. An instrument for
quantifying meibomian lipid on the lid margin: the Meibometer. Curr Eye
Res 1993;12:247e54.
[187] Holly FJ, Lemp MA. Tear physiology and dry eyes. Surv Ophthalmol 1977;22:
69e87.
[188] McCulley JP, Shine W. A compositional based model for the tear film lipid
layer. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 1997;95:79e88. discussion 88e93.
[189] Butovich IA. On the lipid composition of human meibum and tears:
comparative analysis of nonpolar lipids. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:
3779e89.
[190] Green-Church KB, Butovich I, Willcox M, Borchman D, Paulsen F, Barabino S,
et al. The international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of
the subcommittee on tear film lipids and lipid-protein interactions in health
and disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:1979e93.
[191] Millar TJ. Elucidate the contribution of proteins to tears. A challenge for
researchers. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol 2006;81:187e90.
[192] Bron AJ, Tomlinson A, Foulks GN, Pepose JS, Baudouin C, Geerling G, et al.
Rethinking dry eye disease: a perspective on clinical implications. Ocul Surf
2014;12:S1e31.
[193] King-Smith PE, Fink BA, Hill RM, Koelling KW, Tiffany JM. The thickness of
the tear film. Curr Eye Res 2004;29:357e68.
[194] Yokoi N, Yamada H, Mizukusa Y, Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Kato T, et al. Rheology of
tear film lipid layer spread in normal and aqueous tear-deficient dry eyes.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:5319e24.
[195] Goto E, Tseng SC. Kinetic analysis of tear interference images in aqueous tear
deficiency dry eye before and after punctal occlusion. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2003;44:1897e905.
[196] Sullivan DA, Tsubota K, Dartt DA, Stern ME, Sullivan RM, Bromberg BB, ed￾itors. Lacrimal Gland, Tear Film and Dry Eye Syndromes 3. Basic Science and
Clinical Relevance. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Press; 2002.
[197] Yokoi N, Bron AJ, Georgiev GA. The precorneal tear film as a fluid shell: the
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 492
effect of blinking and saccades on tear film distribution and dynamics. Ocul
Surf 2014;12:252e66.
[198] Yanez-Soto B, Mannis MJ, Schwab IR, Li JY, Leonard BC, Abbott NL, et al. ~
Interfacial phenomena and the ocular surface. Ocul Surf 2014;12:178e201.
[199] Rolando M, Valente C, Barabino S. New test to quantify lipid layer behavior in
healthy subjects and patients with keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Cornea
2008;27:866e70.
[200] Cher I. A new look at lubrication of the ocular surface: fluid mechanics
behind the blinking eyelids. Ocul Surf 2008;6:79e86.
[201] Holly FJ, Lemp MA. Wettability and wetting of corneal epithelium. Exp Eye
Res 1971;11:239e50.
[202] Norn MS. Vital staining of the canaliculus lacrimalis and the palpebral border
(Marx' line). Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1966;44:948e59.
[203] Norn MS. Dead, degenerate, and living cells in conjunctival fluid and mucous
thread. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1969;47:1102e15.
[204] Garreis F, Gottschalt M, Paulsen FP. Antimicrobial peptides as a major part of
the innate immune defense at the ocular surface. Dev Ophthalmol 2010;45:
16e22.
[205] Van Haeringen NJ. Clinical biochemistry of tears. Surv Ophthalmol 1981;26:
84e96.
[206] Paulsen F. Cell and molecular biology of human lacrimal gland and nasola￾crimal duct mucins. Int Rev Cytol 2006;249:229e79.
[207] Bron AJ, Yokoi N, Gafney E, Tiffany JM. Predicted phenotypes of dry eye:
proposed consequences of its natural history. Ocul Surf 2009;7:78e92.
[208] Mackie IA, Seal DV. The questionably dry eye. Br J Ophthalmol 1981;65:2e9.
[209] Sack RA, Tan KO, Tan A. Diurnal tear cycle: evidence for a nocturnal in-
flammatory constitutive tear fluid. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1992;33:
626e40.
[210] Fullard RJ, Carney LG. Diurnal variation in human tear enzymes. Exp Eye Res
1984;38:15e26.
[211] Fullard RJ, Carney LG. Human tear enzyme changes as indicators of the
corneal response to anterior hypoxia. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1985;63:
678e83.
[212] Carney LG, Hill RM. Human tear pH. Diurnal variations. Arch Ophthalmol
1976;94:821e4.
[213] Terry JE, Hill RM. Human tear osmotic pressure: diurnal variations and the
closed eye. Arch Ophthalmol 1978;96:120e2.
[214] Bonanno JA, Polse KA. Measurement of in vivo human corneal stromal pH:
open and closed eyes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1987;28:522e30.
[215] McNamara NA, Chan JS, Han SC, Polse KA, McKenney CD. Effects of hypoxia
on corneal epithelial permeability. Am J Ophthalmol 1999;127:153e7.
[216] Daum KM, Hill RM. Human tears: glucose instabilities. Acta Ophthalmol
(Copenh) 1984;62:530e6.
[217] Jordan A, Baum J. Basic tear flow. Does it exist? Ophthalmology 1980;87:
920e30.
[218] Sack RA, Beaton A, Sathe S, Morris C, Willcox M, Bogart B. Towards a closed
eye model of the pre-ocular tear layer. Prog Retin Eye Res 2000;19:649e68.
[219] Fullard RJ, Tucker DL. Changes in human tear protein levels with progres￾sively increasing stimulus. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1991;32:2290e301.
[220] Sack RA, Underwood PA, Tan KO, Sutherland H, Morris CA. Vitronectin:
possible contribution to the closed-eye external host-defense mechanism.
Ocul Immunol Inflamm 1993;1:327e36.
[221] Sathe S, Sakata M, Beaton AR, Sack RA. Identification, origins and the diurnal
role of the principal serine protease inhibitors in human tear fluid. Curr Eye
Res 1998;17:348e62.
[222] Lan JX, Willcox MD, Jackson GD, Thakur A. Effect of tear secretory IgA on
chemotaxis of polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Aust N Z J Ophthalmol
1998;26(Suppl 1):S36e9.
[223] Conners MS, Stoltz RA, Davis KL, Dunn MW, Abraham NG, Levere RD, et al. A
closed eye contact lens model of corneal inflammation. Part 2: inhibition of
cytochrome P450 arachidonic acid metabolism alleviates inflammatory
sequelae. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1995;36:841e50.
[224] Willcox MD, Morris CA, Thakur A, Sack RA, Wickson J, Boey W. Complement
and complement regulatory proteins in human tears. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 1997;38:1e8.
[225] Sonawane S, Khanolkar V, Namavari A, Chaudhary S, Gandhi S, Tibrewal S,
et al. Ocular surface extracellular DNA and nuclease activity imbalance: a
new paradigm for inflammation in dry eye disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2012;53:8253e63.
[226] Lande R, Gregorio J, Facchinetti V, Chatterjee B, Wang YH, Homey B, et al.
Plasmacytoid dendritic cells sense self-DNA coupled with antimicrobial
peptide. Nature 2007;449:564e9.
[227] Pisetsky DS. The origin and properties of extracellular DNA: from PAMP to
DAMP. Clin Immunol 2012;144:32e40.
[228] Schnare M, Holt AC, Takeda K, Akira S, Medzhitov R. Recognition of CpG DNA
is mediated by signaling pathways dependent on the adaptor protein
MyD88. Curr Biol 2000;10:1139e42.
[229] Hayashi F, Means TK, Luster AD. Toll-like receptors stimulate human
neutrophil function. Blood 2003;102:2660e9.
[230] Nance SC, Yi AK, Re FC, Fitzpatrick EA. MyD88 is necessary for neutrophil
recruitment in hypersensitivity pneumonitis. J Leukoc Biol 2008;83:
1207e17.
[231] Krysko DV, Agostinis P, Krysko O, Garg AD, Bachert C, Lambrecht BN, et al.
Emerging role of damage-associated molecular patterns derived from
mitochondria in inflammation. Trends Immunol 2011;32:157e64.
[232] Chinnery HR, McLenachan S, Binz N, Sun Y, Forrester JV, Degli-Esposti MA,
et al. TLR9 ligand CpG-ODN applied to the injured mouse cornea elicits
retinal inflammation. Am J Pathol 2012;180:209e20.
[233] Gottenberg JE, Cagnard N, Lucchesi C, Letourneur F, Mistou S, Lazure T, et al.
Activation of IFN pathways and plasmacytoid dendritic cell recruitment in
target organs of primary Sjogren's syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2006;103:2770e5.
[234] Barabino S, Chen Y, Chauhan S, Dana R. Ocular surface immunity: homeo￾static mechanisms and their disruption in dry eye disease. Prog Retin Eye Res
2012;31:271e85.
[235] Corrales RM, Villarreal A, Farley W, Stern ME, Li DQ, Pflugfelder SC. Strain￾related cytokine profiles on the murine ocular surface in response to
desiccating stress. Cornea 2007;26:579e84.
[236] Fuchs TA, Abed U, Goosmann C, Hurwitz R, Schulze I, Wahn V, et al. Novel
cell death program leads to neutrophil extracellular traps. J Cell Biol
2007;176:231e41.
[237] Saffarzadeh M, Juenemann C, Queisser MA, Lochnit G, Barreto G, Galuska SP,
et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps directly induce epithelial and endothelial
cell death: a predominant role of histones. PLoS One 2012;7. e32366.
[238] Xu J, Zhang X, Pelayo R, Monestier M, Ammollo CT, Semeraro F, et al.
Extracellular histones are major mediators of death in sepsis. Nat Med
2009;15:1318e21.
[239] Reinholz M, Ruzicka T, Schauber J. Cathelicidin LL-37: an antimicrobial
peptide with a role in inflammatory skin disease. Ann Dermatol 2012;24:
126e35.
[240] Song JS, Kang CM, Rhee CK, et al. Effects of elastase inhibitor on the epithelial
cell apoptosis in bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Exp Lung Res
2009;35:817e29.
[241] Blalock TD, Spurr-Michaud SJ, Tisdale AS, Gipson IK. Release of membrane￾associated mucins from ocular surface epithelia. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2008;49:1864e71.
[242] Aknin ML, Berry M, Dick AD, Khan-Lim D. Normal but not altered mucins
activate neutrophils. Cell Tissue Res 2004;318:545e51.
[243] Medina E. Neutrophil extracellular traps: a strategic tactic to defeat patho￾gens with potential consequences for the host. J Innate Immun 2009;1:
176e80.
[244] Tibrewal S, Ivanir Y, Sarkar J, Nayeb-Hashemi N, Bouchard CS, Kim E, et al.
Hyperosmolar stress induces neutrophil extracellular trap formation: im￾plications for dry eye disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:7961e9.
[245] Tibrewal S, Sarkar J, Jassim SH, Gandhi S, Sonawane S, Chaudhary S, et al.
Tear fluid extracellular DNA: diagnostic and therapeutic implications in dry
eye disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:8051e61.
[246] Sullivan BD, Crews LA, Sonmez B, de la Paz MF, Comert E, Charoenrook V,
et al. Clinical utility of objective tests for dry eye disease: variability over
time and implications for clinical trials and disease management. Cornea
2012;31:1000e8.
[247] Stern ME, Gao J, Siemasko KF, Beuerman RW, Pflugfelder SC. The role of the
lacrimal functional unit in the pathophysiology of dry eye. Exp Eye Res
2004;78:409e16.
[248] Paulsen F. The human nasolacrimal ducts. Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol
2003;170(III-XI):1e106.
[249] Rozsa AJ, Beuerman RW. Density and organization of free nerve endings in
the corneal epithelium of the rabbit. Pain 1982;14:105e20.
[250] McGowan DP, Lawrenson JG, Ruskell GL. Touch sensitivity of the eyelid
margin and palpebral conjunctiva. Acta Ophthalmol 1994;72:57e60.
[251] Ruskell GL. Distribution of pterygopalatine ganglion efferents to the lacrimal
gland in man. Exp Eye Res 2004;78:329e35.
[252] Willshire C, Buckley RJ, Bron AJ. Central connections of the lacrimal func￾tional unit. Cornea 2017. in press.
[253] Schargus M, Geerling G. The “wet” dry eye. Ophthalmologe 2009;106:235e8.
40-41.
[254] Cross DA, Krupin T. Implications of the effects of general anesthesia on basal
tear production. Anesth Analg 1977;56:35e7.
[255] Heigle TJ, Pflugfelder SC. Aqueous tear production in patients with neuro￾trophic keratitis. Cornea 1996;15:135e8.
[256] Murube J, Murube L, Murube A. Origin and types of emotional tearing. Eur J
Ophthalmol 1999;9:77e84.
[257] Standring S. Grays Anatomy 40thEdition. Anatomical Basis Of Clinical Prac￾ticevol. 40. London: Churchill Livingstone; 2008. p. 415.
[258] Collins M, Seeto R, Campbell L, Ross M. Blinking and corneal sensitivity. Acta
Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1989;67:525e31.
[259] Toda I, Asano-Kato N, Komai-Hori Y, Tsubota K. Dry eye after laser in situ
keratomileusis. Am J Ophthalmol 2001;132:1e7.
[260] Collins MJ, Kloevekorn-Norgall K, Buehren T, Voetz SC, Lingelbach B.
Regression of lid-induced corneal topography changes after reading. Optom
Vis Sci 2005;82:843e9.
[261] Tsubota K. Tear dynamics and dry eye. Prog Retin Eye Res 1998;17:565e96.
[262] Tsubota K, Nakamori K. Effects of ocular surface area and blink rate on tear
dynamics. Arch Ophthalmol 1995;113:155e8.
[263] Tsubota K, et al. Quantitative videographic analysis of blinking in normal
subjects and patients with dry eye. Arch Ophthalmol 1996;114(6):715e20.
[264] Alex A, Edwards A, Hays JD, Kerkstra M, Shih A, de Paiva CS, et al. Factors
predicting the ocular surface response to desiccating environmental stress.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:3325e32.
[265] Moore QL, De Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC. Effects of dry eye therapies on
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 493
environmentally induced ocular surface disease. Am J Ophthalmol 2015;160:
135e42. e1.
[266] Montes-Mico R, Alio JL, Charman WN. Dynamic changes in the tear film in
dry eyes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:1615e9.
[267] Pflugfelder SC. Tear dysfunction and the cornea: LXVIII Edward Jackson
memorial lecture. Am J Ophthalmol 2011;152:900e9. e1.
[268] Baudouin C, Aragona P, Messmer EM, Tomlinson A, Calonge M, Boboridis KG,
et al. Role of hyperosmolarity in the pathogenesis and management of dry
eye disease: proceedings of the OCEAN group meeting. Ocul Surf 2013;11:
246e58.
[269] Lemp MA, Bron AJ, Baudouin C, Benitez Del Castillo JM, Geffen D, Tauber J,
et al. Tear osmolarity in the diagnosis and management of dry eye disease.
Am J Ophthalmol 2011;151:792e8. e791.
[270] Tomlinson A, Khanal S, Ramaesh K, Diaper C, McFadyen A. Tear film osmo￾larity: determination of a referent for dry eye diagnosis. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2006;47:4309e15.
[271] Sullivan BD, Pepose JS, Foulks GN. Progressively increased variation in tear
osmolarity mirrors dry eye severity. JAMA Ophthalmol 2015;133:1481e2.
[272] Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Yokoi N, Gouveia SM. Using osmolarity to diagnose dry
eye: a compartmental hypothesis and review of our assumptions. Adv Exp
Med Biol 2002;506:1087e95.
[273] Begley CG, Himebaugh N, Renner D, Liu H, Chalmers R, Simpson T, et al. Tear
breakup dynamics: a technique for quantifying tear film instability. Optom
Vis Sci 2006;83:15e21.
[274] Liu H, Begley CG, Chalmers R, Wilson G, Srinivas SP, Wilkinson JA. Temporal
progression and spatial repeatability of tear breakup. Optom Vis Sci 2006;83:
723e30.
[275] Harrison WW, Begley CG, Liu H, Chen M, Garcia M, Smith JA. Menisci and
fullness of the blink in dry eye. Optom Vis Sci 2008;85:706e14.
[276] Liu H, Begley C, Chen M, Bradley A, Bonanno J, McNamara NA, et al. A link
between tear instability and hyperosmolarity in dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2009;50:3671e9.
[277] Braun RJ, Gewecke NR, Begley CG, King-Smith PE, Siddique JI. A model for
tear film thinning with osmolarity and fluorescein. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2014;55:1133e42.
[278] Braun RJ, King-Smith PE, Begley CG, Li L, Gewecke NR. Dynamics and func￾tion of the tear film in relation to the blink cycle. Prog Retin Eye Res 2015;45:
132e64.
[279] Peng CC, Cerretani C, Braun RJ, Radke CJ. Evaporation-driven instability of the
precorneal tear film. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2014;206:250e64.
[280] Nichols JJ, King-Smith PE, Hinel EA, Thangavelu M, Nichols KK. The use of
fluorescent quenching in studying the contribution of evaporation to tear
thinning. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:5426e32.
[281] Sullivan BD, Whitmer D, Nichols KK, Tomlinson A, Foulks GN, Geerling G,
et al. An objective approach to dry eye disease severity. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2010;51:6125e30.
[282] Szalai E, Berta A, Szekanecz Z, Szucs G, Modis Jr L. Evaluation of tear os￾molarity in non-Sjogren and Sjogren syndrome dry eye patients with the
TearLab system. Cornea 2012;31:867e71.
[283] Fortes MB, Diment BC, Di Felice U, Gunn AE, Kendall JL, Esmaeelpour M, et al.
Tear fluid osmolarity as a potential marker of hydration status. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 2011;43:1590e7.
[284] Walsh NP, Fortes MB, Esmaeelpour M. Influence of modest changes in
whole-body hydration on tear fluid osmolarity: important considerations for
dry eye disease detection. Cornea 2011;30:1517. author reply 1517e1518.
[285] Walsh NP, Fortes MB, Raymond-Barker P, Bishop C, Owen J, Tye E, et al. Is
whole-body hydration an important consideration in dry eye? Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:6622e7.
[286] Craig JP, et al. Tear lipid layer structure and stability following expression of
the meibomian glands. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 1995;15(6):569e74.
[287] Arciniega JC, Wojtowicz JC, Mohamed EM, McCulley JP. Changes in the
evaporation rate of tear film after digital expression of meibomian glands in
patients with and without dry eye. Cornea 2011;30:843e7.
[288] Tsubota K, Nakamori K. Effects of ocular surface area and blink rate on tear
dynamics. Arch Ophthalmol 1995;113:155e8.
[289] Ousler 3rd GW, Rodriguez JD, Smith LM, Lane KJ, Heckley C, Angjeli E, et al.
Optimizing reading tests for dry eye disease. Cornea 2015;34:917e21.
[290] Jansen ME, Begley CG, Himebaugh NH, Port NL. Effect of contact lens wear
and a near task on tear film break-up. Optom Vis Sci 2010;87:350e7.
[291] Tsubota K, Miyake M, Matsumoto Y, Shintani M. Visual protective sheet can
increase blink rate while playing a hand-held video game. Am J Ophthalmol
2002;133(5):704e5.
[292] Rieger G. The importance of the precorneal tear film for the quality of optical
imaging. Br J Ophthalmol 1992;76:157e8.
[293] Tutt R, Bradley A, Begley C, Thibos LN. Optical and visual impact of tear
break-up in human eyes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:4117e23.
[294] Puell MC, Benitez-del-Castillo JM, Martinez-de-la-Casa J, Sanchez-Ramos C,
Vico E, Perez-Carrasco MJ, et al. Contrast sensitivity and disability glare in
patients with dry eye. Acta Ophthalmol Scand 2006;84:527e31.
[295] Diaz-Valle D, Arriola-Villalobos P, Garcia-Vidal SE, Sanchez-Pulgarin M,
Borrego Sanz L, Gegundez-Fernandez JA, et al. Effect of lubricating eyedrops
on ocular light scattering as a measure of vision quality in patients with dry
eye. J Cataract Refract Surg 2012;38:1192e7.
[296] Ridder 3rd WH, Tomlinson A, Huang JF, Li J. Impaired visual performance in
patients with dry eye. Ocul Surf 2011;9:42e55.
[297] Kaido M, Dogru M, Ishida R, Tsubota K. Concept of functional visual acuity
and its applications. Cornea 2007;26:S29e35.
[298] Kaido M, Uchino MN, Uchino Y, Dogru M, Kawashima M, et al. Dry-eye
screening by using a functional visual acuity measurement system: the
Osaka Study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:3275e81.
[299] Lemp MA, Hamill Jr JR. Factors affecting tear film breakup in normal eyes.
Arch Ophthalmol 1973;89(2):103e5.
[300] Ousler 3rd GW, Hagberg KW, Schindelar M, Welch D, Abelson MB. The
Ocular Protection Index. Cornea 2008;27:509e13.
[301] Ruiz-Ederra J, Levin MH, Verkman AS. In situ fluorescence measurement of
tear film [Naþ], [Kþ], [Cl-], and pH in mice shows marked hypertonicity in
aquaporin-5 deficiency. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;50:2132e8.
[302] Ogasawara K, Mitsubayashi K, Tsuru T, Karube I. Electrical conductivity of
tear fluid in healthy persons and keratoconjunctivitis sicca patients
measured by a flexible conductimetric sensor. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Oph￾thalmol 1996;234:542e6.
[303] Gupta Y, Gupta M, Rizvi SA, Gupta M. 'Xerosis meter': a new concept in dry
eye evaluation. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2006;244:9e13.
[304] Tsubota K, Yamada M. Tear evaporation from the ocular surface. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1992;33:2942e50.
[305] Uchiyama E, Aronowicz JD, Butovich IA, McCulley JP. Increased evaporative
rates in laboratory testing conditions simulating airplane cabin relative hu￾midity: an important factor for dry eye syndrome. Eye Contact Lens 2007;33:
174e6.
[306] Enriquez-de-Salamanca A, Castellanos E, Stern ME, Fernandez I, Carreno E,
Garcia-Vazquez C, et al. Tear cytokine and chemokine analysis and clinical
correlations in evaporative-type dry eye disease. Mol Vis 2010;16:862e73.
[307] Beardsley RM, De Paiva CS, Power DF, Pflugfelder SC. Desiccating stress de￾creases apical corneal epithelial cell sizeemodulation by the metal￾loproteinase inhibitor doxycycline. Cornea 2008;27:935e40.
[308] Li MO, Wan YY, Sanjabi S, Robertson AK, Flavell RA. Transforming growth
factor-beta regulation of immune responses. Annu Rev Immunol 2006;24:
99e146.
[309] Luo L, Li DQ, Doshi A, Farley W, Corrales RM, Pflugfelder SC. Experimental dry
eye stimulates production of inflammatory cytokines and MMP-9 and acti￾vates MAPK signaling pathways on the ocular surface. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2004;45:4293e301.
[310] Li DQ, Chen Z, Song XJ, Farley W, Pflugfelder SC. Hyperosmolarity Stimulates
Production of MMP-9, IL-1a and TNF- by Human Corneal Epithelial Cells Via
a c-Jun NH 2- terminal kinase pathway. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002;43.
EAbstract 1981.
[311] Li DQ, Chen Z, Song XJ, Luo L, Pflugfelder SC. Stimulation of matrix metal￾loproteinases by hyperosmolarity via a JNK pathway in human corneal
epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45:4302e11.
[312] Li DQ, Lokeshwar BL, Solomon A, Monroy D, Ji Z, Pflugfelder SC. Regulation of
MMP-9 production by human corneal epithelial cells. Exp Eye Res 2001;73:
449e59.
[313] Kim HS, Luo L, Pflugfelder SC, Li DQ. Doxycycline inhibits TGF-beta1-induced
MMP-9 via Smad and MAPK pathways in human corneal epithelial cells.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:840e8.
314 Huet E, Vallee B, Delbe J, Mourah S, Pruliere-Escabasse V, Tremouilleres M,
et al. EMMPRIN modulates epithelial barrier function through a MMP-medi￾ated occludin cleavage: implications in dry eye disease. Am J Pathol 2011;179:
1278e86.
[315] Pflugfelder SC, de Paiva CS, Tong L, Luo L, Stern ME, Li DQ. Stress-activated
protein kinase signaling pathways in dry eye and ocular surface disease. Ocul
Surf 2005;3:S154e7.
[316] Chotikavanich S, de Paiva CS, D.-Q L, Chen JJ, Bian F, Farley WJ, et al. Pro￾duction and activity of matrix Metalloproteinase-9 on the ocular surface
increase in dysfunctional tear syndrome. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;50:
3203e9.
[317] Schargus M, Ivanova S, Kakkassery V, Dick HB, Joachim S. Correlation of Tear
Film Osmolarity and 2 Different MMP-9 Tests With Common Dry Eye Tests in
a Cohort of Non-Dry Eye Patients. Cornea 2015;34:739e44.
[318] VanDerMeid KR, Su SP, Ward KW, Zhang JZ. Correlation of tear inflammatory
cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases with four dry eye diagnostic tests.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:1512e8.
[319] Gabison EE, Huet E, Baudouin C, Menashi S. Direct epithelial-stromal inter￾action in corneal wound healing: Role of EMMPRIN/CD147 in MMPs in￾duction and beyond. Prog Retin Eye Res 2009;28:19e33.
[320] Labbe A, Gabison E, Brignole-Baudouin F, Riancho L, Menashi S, Baudouin C.
Increased extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (EMMPRIN)
expression in the conjunctival epithelium exposed to antiglaucoma treat￾ments. Curr Eye Res 2015;40:40e7.
[321] Mauris J, Mantelli F, Woodward AM, Cao Z, Bertozzi CR, Panjwani N, et al.
Modulation of ocular surface glycocalyx barrier function by a galectin-3 N￾terminal deletion mutant and membrane-anchored synthetic glycopol￾ymers. PLoS One 2013;8. e72304.
[322] Pult H, et al. Spontaneous blinking from a tribological viewpoint. Ocul Surf
2015;13(3):236e49.
[323] Ehlers N. The Precorneal Film. Biomicroscopical, Histological and Chemical
Investigations. Acta Ophthalmol Suppl 1965;(Suppl 81):81e134.
[324] Korb DR, Herman JP, Blackie CA, Scaffidi RC, Greiner JV, Exford JM, et al.
Prevalence of lid wiper epitheliopathy in subjects with dry eye signs and
symptoms. Cornea 2010;29:377e83.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 494
[325] Pult H, Tosatti SG, Spencer ND, Asfour JM, Ebenhoch M, Murphy PJ. Spon￾taneous Blinking from a Tribological Viewpoint. Ocul Surf 2015;13:236e49.
[326] Jones MB, Fulford GR, Please CP, McElwain DL, Collins MJ. Elastohydrody￾namics of the eyelid wiper. Bull Math Biol 2008;70:323e43.
[327] Bielecki P, Komor U, Bielecka A, Musken M, Puchalka J, Pletz MW, et al. Ex
vivo transcriptional profiling reveals a common set of genes important for
the adaptation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to chronically infected host sites.
Environ Microbiol 2013;15:570e87.
[328] Bielecki T, Dohan Ehrenfest DM. Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and Platelet-Rich
Fibrin (PRF): surgical adjuvants, preparations for in situ regenerative medi￾cine and tools for tissue engineering. Curr Pharm Biotechnol 2012;13:
1121e30.
[329] Swann DA, Slayter HS, Silver FH. The molecular structure of lubricating
glycoprotein-I, the boundary lubricant for articular cartilage. J Biol Chem
1981;256:5921e5.
[330] Cheriyan T, Schmid TM, Spector M. Presence and distribution of the lubri￾cating protein, lubricin, in the meibomian gland in rabbits. Mol Vis 2011;17:
3055e61.
[331] Morrison S, Sullivan DA, Sullivan BD, Sheardown H, Schmidt TA. Dose￾dependent and synergistic effects of proteoglycan 4 on boundary lubrication
at a human cornea-polydimethylsiloxane biointerface. Eye Contact Lens
2012;38:27e35.
[332] Samsom ML, Morrison S, Masala N, Sullivan BD, Sullivan DA, Sheardown H,
et al. Characterization of full-length recombinant human Proteoglycan 4 as
an ocular surface boundary lubricant. Exp Eye Res 2014;127:14e9.
[333] Lambiase A, Sullivan BD, Schmidt TA, Sullivan DA, Jay G, Truitt ERI, et al. A
two-week, randomized, double-masked study to evaluate safety and efficacy
of lubricin (150 mg/ml) eye drops versus sodium hyaluronate (HA) 0.18% eye
drops (Vismed®) in patients with moderate dry eye disease. Ocul Surf
2017;15:77e87.
[334] Doane MG. Interactions of eyelids and tears in corneal wetting and the dy￾namics of the normal human eyeblink. Am J Ophthalmol 1980;89:507e16.
[335] Cher I. Another way to think of tears: blood, sweat, and... “dacruon”. Ocul
Surf 2007;5:251e4.
[336] Cher I. Fluids of the ocular surface: concepts, functions and physics. Clin Exp
Ophthalmol 2012;40:634e43.
[337] Dunn AC, Sawyer WG, Angelini TE. Gemini Interfaces in Aqueous Lubrication
with Hydrogels. Tribol Lett 2014;54:59e66.
[338] Pandit JC, Nagyova B, Bron AJ, Tiffany JM. Physical properties of stimulated
and unstimulated tears. Exp Eye Res 1999;68:247e53.
[339] Tiffany JM. The viscosity of human tears. Int Ophthalmol 1991;15:371e6.
[340] Gouveia SM, Tiffany JM. Human tear viscosity: an interactive role for pro￾teins and lipids. Biochim Biophys Acta 2005;1753(2):155e63.
[341] Donald C, Hamilton L, Doughty M. A quantitative assessment of the location
and width of Marx's line along the marginal zone of the human eyelid.
Optom Vis Sci 2003;80:564e72.
[342] Korb DR, Herman JP, Greiner JV, Scaffidi RC, Finnemore VM, Exford JM, et al.
Lid wiper epitheliopathy and dry eye symptoms. Eye Contact Lens 2005;31:
2e8.
[343] (a) Pult H, Riede-Pult BH, Murphy PJ. The relation between blinking and
conjunctival folds and dry eye symptoms. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90(10):
1034e9.
(b) Pult H, Korb DR, Murphy PJ, Riede-Pult BH, Blackie C. A new model of
central lid margin apposition and tear film mixing in spontaneous blinking.
Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2015;38(3):173e80.
[344] (a) Korb DR, Greiner JV, Herman JP, Hebert E, Finnemore VM, Exford JM, et al.
Lid-wiper epitheliopathy and dry-eye symptoms in contact lens wearers.
CLAO J 2002;28:211e6.
(b) Korb DR, Herman JP, Greiner JV, Scaffidi RC, Finnemore VM, Exford JM,
Blackie CA, Douglass T. Lid wiper epitheliopathy and dry eye symptoms. Eye
Contact Lens 2005;31(1):2e8.
[345] Parsons JT, Bova FJ, Fitzgerald CR, Mendenhall WM, Million RR. Severe dry￾eye syndrome following external beam irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys 1994;30:775e80.
[346] Shiraishi A, Yamaguchi M, Ohashi Y. Prevalence of upper- and lower-lid￾wiper epitheliopathy in contact lens wearers and non-wearers. Eye Contact
Lens 2014;40:220e4.
[347] Shaw AJ, Collins MJ, Davis BA, Carney LG. Eyelid pressure and contact with
the ocular surface. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51:1911e7.
[348] Bron AJ, Argueso P, Irkec M, Bright FV. Clinical staining of the ocular surface:
mechanisms and interpretations. Prog Retin Eye Res 2015;44:36e61.
[349] Tseng SC. Concept and application of limbal stem cells. Eye (Lond) 1989;3(Pt
2):141e57.
[350] Bandamwar KL, Papas EB, Garrett Q. Fluorescein staining and physiological
state of corneal epithelial cells. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2014;37:213e23.
[351] Dundas M, Walker A, Woods RL. Clinical grading of corneal staining of non￾contact lens wearers. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 2001;21:30e5.
[352] Norn MS. Vital staining of cornea and conjunctiva. Acta Ophthalmol
(Copenh) 1962;40:389e401.
[353] Korb DR, Korb JM. Corneal staining prior to contact lens wearing. J Am
Optom Assoc 1970;41(3):228e32.
[354] Korb DR, Herman JP. Corneal staining subsequent to sequential fluorescein
instillations. J Am Optom Assoc 1979;50:361e7.
[355] Josephson JE, Caffery BE. Corneal staining after instillation of topical anes￾thetic (SSII). Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1988;29:1096e9.
[356] Caffery BE, Josephson JE. Corneal staining after sequential instillations of
fluorescein over 30 days. Optom Vis Sci 1991;68:467e9.
[357] Brautaset RL, Nilsson M, Leach N, Miller WL, Gire A, Quintero S, et al. Corneal
and conjunctival epithelial staining in hydrogel contact lens wearers. Eye
Contact Lens 2008;34:312e6.
[358] Efron N. Response to re: putting vital stains in context. Clin Exp Optom
2013;96:511e2.
[359] Lakkis C, Brennan NA. Bulbar conjunctival fluorescein staining in hydrogel
contact lens wearers. CLAO J 1996;22:189e94.
[360] Norn MS. Desiccation of the precorneal film. I. Corneal wetting-time. Acta
Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1969;47:865e80.
[361] Soni PS, Horner DG, Ross J. Ocular response to lens care systems in adoles￾cent soft contact lens wearers. Optom Vis Sci 1996;73:70e85.
[362] Schwallie JD, Long Jr WD, McKenney CD. Day to day variations in ocular
surface staining of the bulbar conjunctiva. Optom Vis Sci 1998;75:55e61.
[363] Mokhtarzadeh M, Casey R, Glasgow BJ. Fluorescein punctate staining traced
to superficial corneal epithelial cells by impression cytology and confocal
microscopy. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:2127e35.
[364] Morgan PB, Maldonado-Codina C. Corneal staining: do we really understand
what we are seeing? Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2009;32:48e54.
[365] Ward KW. Superficial punctate fluorescein staining of the ocular surface.
Optom Vis Sci 2008;85:8e16.
[366] Luensmann D, Moezzi A, Peterson RC, Woods C, Fonn D. Corneal staining and
cell shedding during the development of solution-induced corneal staining.
Optom Vis Sci 2012;89:868e74.
[367] Zhou J, Begley CG, Wright A, Wilson G, Tokarski T. Characterization of cells
collected from the normal human ocular surface by contact lens cytology.
Cornea 2000;19:824e32.
[368] Ren H, Wilson G. Apoptosis in the corneal epithelium. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 1996;37:1017e25.
[369] Estil S, Primo EJ, Wilson G. Apoptosis in shed human corneal cells. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:3360e4.
[370] Feenstra RP, Tseng SC. What is actually stained by rose bengal? Arch Oph￾thalmol 1992;110:984e93.
[371] Feenstra RP, Tseng SC. Comparison of fluorescein and rose bengal staining.
Ophthalmology 1992;99:605e17.
[372] Wilson G, Ren H, Laurent J. Corneal epithelial fluorescein staining. J Am
Optom Assoc 1995;66:435e41.
[373] Kikkawa Y. Normal corneal staining with fluorescein. Exp Eye Res 1972;14:
13e20.
[374] Bandamwar KL, Garrett Q, Papas EB. Mechanisms of superficial micro￾punctate corneal staining with sodium fluorescein: the contribution of
pooling. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2012;35:81e4.
[375] Shimazaki J, Goto E, Ono M, Shimmura S, Tsubota K. Meibomian gland
dysfunction in patients with Sjogren syndrome. Ophthalmology 1998;105:
1485e8.
[376] Shimazaki J, Sakata M, Tsubota K. Ocular surface changes and discomfort in
patients with meibomian gland dysfunction. Arch Ophthalmol 1995;113:
1266e70.
[377] Baudouin C. A new approach for better comprehension of diseases of the
ocular surface. J Fr Ophtalmol 2007;30:239e46.
[378] De Paiva CS, Corrales RM, Villarreal AL, Farley WJ, Li DQ, Stern ME, et al.
Corticosteroid and doxycycline suppress MMP-9 and inflammatory cytokine
expression, MAPK activation in the corneal epithelium in experimental dry
eye. Exp Eye Res 2006;83:526e35.
[379] Baudouin C. The pathology of dry eye. Surv Ophthalmol 2001;45(Suppl 2):
S211e20.
[380] Yeh S, Song XJ, Farley W, Li DQ, Stern ME, Pflugfelder SC. Apoptosis of ocular
surface cells in experimentally induced dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2003;44:124e9.
[381] Brignole F, Pisella PJ, Goldschild M, De Saint Jean M, Goguel A, Baudouin C.
Flow cytometric analysis of inflammatory markers in conjunctival epithelial
cells of patients with dry eyes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:1356e63.
[382] Kunert KS, Tisdale AS, Gipson IK. Goblet cell numbers and epithelial prolif￾eration in the conjunctiva of patients with dry eye syndrome treated with
cyclosporine. Arch Ophthalmol 2002;120:330e7.
[383] Argueso P, Balaram M, Spurr-Michaud S, Keutmann HT, Dana MR, Gipson IK.
Decreased levels of the goblet cell mucin MUC5AC in tears of patients with
Sjogren syndrome. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002;43:1004e11.
[384] Zhao H, Jumblatt JE, Wood TO, Jumblatt MM. Quantification of MUC5AC
protein in human tears. Cornea 2001;20:873e7.
[385] Baudouin C, Messmer EM, AragonaJ P, Geerling G, Akova YA, Benitez-Del￾Castillo J, et al. Revisiting the vicious circle of dry eye disease: a focus on the
pathophysiology of meibomian gland dysfunction. Br J Ophthalmol
2016;100:300e6.
[386] Abreau K, Callan C, Kottaiyan R, Zhang A, Yoon G, Aquavella JV, et al. Tem￾peratures of the Ocular Surface, Lid, and Periorbital Regions of Sjogren's,
Evaporative, and Aqueous-Deficient Dry Eyes Relative to Normals. Ocul Surf
2016;14:64e73.
[387] De Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC. Corneal epitheliopathy of dry eye induces hy￾peresthesia to mechanical air jet stimulation. Am J Ophthalmol 2004;137:
109e15.
[388] Xu KP, Yagi Y, Toda I, Tsubota K. Tear function index. A new measure of dry
eye. Arch Ophthalmol 1995;113:84e8.
[389] Bourcier T, Acosta MC, Borderie V, Borras F, Gallar J, Bury T, et al. Decreased
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 495
corneal sensitivity in patients with dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2005;46:2341e5.
[390] Villani E, Magnani F, Viola F, Santaniello A, Scorza R, Nucci P, et al. In vivo
confocal evaluation of the ocular surface morpho-functional unit in dry eye.
Optom Vis Sci 2013;90:576e86.
[391] Begley C, Simpson T, Liu H, Salvo E, Wu Z, Bradley A, et al. Quantitative
analysis of tear film fluorescence and discomfort during tear film instability
and thinning. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:2645e53.
[392] Vehof J, Sillevis Smitt-Kamminga N, Kozareva D, Nibourg SA, Hammond CJ.
Clinical Characteristics of Dry Eye Patients With Chronic Pain Syndromes.
Am J Ophthalmol 2016;162:59e65. e2.
[393] Pflugfelder SC, Maskin SL, Anderson B, Chodosh J, Holland EJ, De Paiva CS,
et al. A randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled, multicenter com￾parison of loteprednol etabonate ophthalmic suspension, 0.5%, and placebo
for treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in patients with delayed tear
clearance. Am J Ophthalmol 2004;138:444e57.
[394] Hirata H, Rosenblatt MI. Hyperosmolar tears enhance cooling sensitivity of
the corneal nerves in rats: possible neural basis for cold-induced dry eye
pain. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:5821e33.
[395] Madrid R, de la Pena E, Donovan-Rodriguez T, Belmonte C, Viana F. Variable
threshold of trigeminal cold-thermosensitive neurons is determined by a
balance between TRPM8 and Kv1 potassium channels. J Neurosci 2009;29:
3120e31.
[396] Chen L, Li J, Guo T, Ghosh S, Koh SK, Tian D, et al. Global Metabonomic and
Proteomic Analysis of Human Conjunctival Epithelial Cells (IOBA-NHC) in
Response to Hyperosmotic Stress. J Proteom Res 2015;14:3982e95.
[397] Tabery HM. Dual appearance of fluorescein staining in vivo of diseased hu￾man corneal epithelium. A non-contact photomicrographic study. Br J
Ophthalmol 1992;76:43e4.
[398] Tabery HM. Micropunctate fluorescein staining of the human corneal sur￾face: microerosions or cystic spaces? A non-contact photomicrographic in
vivo study. Acta Ophthalmol Scand 1997;75:134e6.
[399] Watanabe H, Fabricant M, Tisdale AS, Spurr-Michaud SJ, Lindberg K,
Gipson IK. Human corneal and conjunctival epithelia produce a mucin-like
glycoprotein for the apical surface. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1995;36:
337e44.
[400] Danjo Y, Watanabe H, Tisdale AS, George M, Tsumura T, Abelson MB, et al.
Alteration of mucin in human conjunctival epithelia in dry eye. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1998;39:2602e9.
[401] Pflugfelder SC, Tseng SC, Yoshino K, Monroy D, Felix C, Reis BL. Correlation of
goblet cell density and mucosal epithelial membrane mucin expression with
rose bengal staining in patients with ocular irritation. Ophthalmology
1997;104:223e35.
[402] Glasgow BJ, Gasymov OK, Casey RC. Exfoliative epitheliopathy of bullous
keratopathy with breaches in the MUC16 Glycocalyx. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2009;50:4060e4.
[403] Komuro A, Yokoi N, Fukuoka H, Kinoshita S. Evaluation of Galection-3
expression in rose bengal-stained conjunctival epithelium. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:3994.
[404] Williams KK, Watsky MA. Bicarbonate promotes dye coupling in the
epithelium and endothelium of the rabbit cornea. Curr Eye Res 2004;28:
109e20.
[405] McMonnies CW. An examination of the relationship between ocular surface
tear osmolarity compartments and epitheliopathy. Ocul Surf 2015;13:
110e7.
[406] Abelson MB, Holly FJ. A tentative mechanism for inferior punctate keratop￾athy. Am J Ophthalmol 1977;83:866e9.
[407] Collins MJ, Iskander DR, Saunders A, Hook S, Anthony E, Gillon R. Blinking
patterns and corneal staining. Eye Contact Lens 2006;32(6):287e93.
[408] Cruz AA, Garcia DM, Pinto CT, Cechetti SP. Spontaneous eyeblink activity.
Ocul Surf 2011;9:29e41.
[409] Himebaugh NL, Begley CG, Bradley A, Wilkinson JA. Blinking and tear break￾up during four visual tasks. Optom Vis Sci 2009;86:E106e14.
[410] Ousler 3rd GW, Abelson MB, Johnston PR, Rodriguez J, Lane K, Smith LM.
Blink patterns and lid-contact times in dry-eye and normal subjects. Clin
Ophthalmol 2014;8:869e74.
[411] Zubkov VS, Breward CJ, Gaffney EA. Meniscal tear film fluid dynamics near
Marx's line. Bull Math Biol 2013;75:1524e43.
[412] Chen AL, Riley DE, King SA, Joshi AC, Serra A, Liao K, et al. The disturbance of
gaze in progressive supranuclear palsy: implications for pathogenesis. Front
Neurol 2010;1:147.
[413] Richardson C, Smith T, Schaefer A, Turnbull D, Griffiths P. Ocular motility
findings in chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia. Eye (Lond)
2005;19:258e63.
[414] Fells P. Management of dysthyroid eye disease. Br J Ophthalmol 1991;75:
245e6.
[415] Tanioka H, Yokoi N, Komuro A, Shimamoto T, Kawasaki S, Matsuda A, et al.
Investation of the corneal filament in filamentary keratitis. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2009;50:3696e702.
[416] Hamilton W, Wood TO. Filamentary keratitis. Am J Ophthalmol 1982;93:
466e9.
[417] Theodore FH. Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis. Eye Ear Nose Throat Mon
1963;42:25e8.
[418] Nelson JD. Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis (SLK). Eye (Lond) 1989;3(Pt
2):180e9.
[419] Tenzel RR. Comments on superior limbic filamentous keratitis: II. Arch
Ophthalmol 1968;79:508.
[420] Yokoi N. Tear dynamics and dry eye. Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi 2004;108:
275e6.
[421] Yokoi N, Inatomi T, Kinoshita S. Surgery of the conjunctiva. Dev Ophthalmol
2008;41:138e58.
[422] Yokoi N, Komuro A, Maruyama K, Tsuzuki M, Miyajima S, Kinoshita S. New
surgical treatment for superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis and its associa￾tion with conjunctivochalasis. Am J Ophthalmol 2003;135:303e8.
[423] Stephens DN, McNamara NA. Altered Mucin and Glycoprotein Expression in
Dry Eye Disease. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92:931e8.
[424] Watanabe H, Maeda N, Kiritoshi A, Hamano T, Shimomura Y, Tano Y.
Expression of a mucin-like glycoprotein produced by ocular surface
epithelium in normal and keratinized cells. Am J Ophthalmol 1997;124:
751e7.
[425] Shimazaki-Den S, Dogru M, Higa K, Shimazaki J. Symptoms, visual function,
and mucin expression of eyes with tear film instability. Cornea 2013;32:
1211e8.
[426] Jones DT, Monroy D, Ji Z, Pflugfelder SC. Alterations of ocular surface gene
expression in Sjogren's syndrome. Adv Exp Med Biol 1998;438:533e6.
[427] Corrales RM, de Paiva CS, Li DQ, Farley WJ, Henriksson JT, Bergmanson JP,
et al. Entrapment of conjunctival goblet cells by desiccation-induced corni-
fication. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:3492e9.
[428] Hayashi Y, Kao WW, Kohno N, Nishihara-Hayashi M, Shiraishi A, Uno T, et al.
Expression patterns of sialylated epitope recognized by KL-6 monoclonal
antibody in ocular surface epithelium of normals and dry eye patients. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45:2212e7.
[429] (a) Caffery B, Joyce E, Heynen ML, Jones L, Ritter 3rd R, Gamache DA, et al.
MUC16 expression in Sjogren's syndrome, KCS, and control subjects. Mol Vis
2008;14:2547e55.
(b) Caffery B, Heynen ML, Joyce E, Jones L, Ritter 3rd R, Senchyna M. MUC1
expression in Sjogren's syndrome, KCS, and control subjects. Mol Vis 2010
Aug 24;16:1720e7.
[430] Gipson IK, Spurr-Michaud SJ, Senchyna M, Ritter 3rd R, Schaumberg D.
Comparison of mucin levels at the ocular surface of postmenopausal women
with and without a history of dry eye. Cornea 2011;30:1346e52.
[431] Srinivasan S, Heynen ML, Martell E, Ritter 3rd R, Jones L, Senchyna M.
Quantification of MUCIN 1, cell surface associated and MUCIN16, cell surface
associated proteins in tears and conjunctival epithelial cells collected from
postmenopausal women. Mol Vis 2013;19:970e9.
[432] Garcher C, Bron A, Baudouin C, Bildstein L, Bara JCA. 19-9 ELISA test: a new
method for studying mucus changes in tears. Br J Ophthalmol 1998;82:
88e90.
[433] Argueso P, Tisdale A, Mandel U, Letko E, Foster CS, Gipson IK. The cell-layer￾and cell-type-specific distribution of GalNAc-transferases in the ocular sur￾face epithelia is altered during keratinization. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2003;44:86e92.
[434] Ralph RA. Conjunctival goblet cell density in normal subjects and in dry eye
syndromes. Invest Ophthalmol 1975;14:299e302.
[435] Kinoshita S, Kiorpes TC, Friend J, Thoft RA. Goblet cell density in ocular
surface disease. A better indicator than tear mucin. Arch Ophthalmol
1983;101:1284e7.
[436] Nelson JD, Wright JC. Conjunctival goblet cell densities in ocular surface
disease. Arch Ophthalmol 1984;102:1049e51.
[437] Blodi BA, Byrne KA, Tabbara KF. Goblet cell population among patients with
inactive trachoma. Int Ophthalmol 1988;12:41e5.
[438] Albietz J, Sanfilippo P, Troutbeck R, Lenton LM. Management of filamentary
keratitis associated with aqueous-deficient dry eye. Optom Vis Sci 2003;80:
420e30.
[439] Murube J, Rivas L. Impression cytology on conjunctiva and cornea in dry eye
patients establishes a correlation between squamous metaplasia and dry eye
clinical severity. Eur J Ophthalmol 2003;13:115e27.
[440] Zhang J, Yan X, Li H. Analysis of the correlations of mucins, inflammatory
markers, and clinical tests in dry eye. Cornea 2013;32(7):928e32.
[441] Pflugfelder SC, Stern ME. Mucosal environmental sensors in the pathogen￾esis of dry eye. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 2014;10:1137e40.
[442] Uchino M, Uchino Y, Dogru M, Kawashima M, Yokoi N, Komuro A, et al. Dry
eye disease and work productivity loss in visual display users: the Osaka
study. Am J Ophthalmol 2014;157:294e300.
[443] Versura P, Maltarello MC, Cellini M, Caramazza R, Laschi R. Detection of
mucus glycoconjugates in human conjunctiva by using the lectin-colloidal
gold technique in TEM. II. A quantitative study in dry-eye patients. Acta
Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1986;64:451e5.
[444] Tapaszto B, Veres A, Kosina-Hagyo K, Somfai GM, Nemeth J. OCT Imaging of
lid-parallel conjunctival folds in soft contact lens wearers. Optom Vis Sci
2011;88:1206e13.
[445] Nemeth J, Fodor E, Lang Z, Kosina-Hagyo K, Berta A, Komar T, et al. Lid￾parallel conjunctival folds (LIPCOF) and dry eye: a multicentre study. Br J
Ophthalmol 2012;96:1380e5.
[446] Meller D, Tseng SC. Conjunctivochalasis: literature review and possible
pathophysiology. Surv Ophthalmol 1998;43:225e32.
[447] Watanabe A, Yokoi N, Kinoshita S, Hino Y, Tsuchihashi Y. Clinicopathologic
study of conjunctivochalasis. Cornea 2004;23:294e8.
[448] Murube J. Characteristics and etiology of conjunctivochalasis: historical
perspective. Ocul Surf 2005;3:7e14.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 496
[449] Pult H, Riede-Pult BH. Impact of conjunctival folds on central tear meniscus
height. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:1459e66.
[450] Norn M. Meibomian orifices and Marx's line. Studied by triple vital staining.
Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1985;63:698e700.
[451] Bron AJ, Yokoi N, Gaffney EA, Tiffany JM. A solute gradient in the tear
meniscus. II. Implications for lid margin disease, including meibomian gland
dysfunction. Ocul Surf 2011;9:92e7.
[452] Korb DR, Blackie CA, McNally EN. Evidence suggesting that the keratinized
portions of the upper and lower lid margins do not make complete contact
during deliberate blinking. Cornea 2013;32(4):491e5.
[453] Li S, Gallup M, Chen YT, McNamara NA. Molecular mechanism of proin-
flammatory cytokine-mediated squamous metaplasia in human corneal
epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51:2466e75.
[454] Yamaguchi M, Kutsuna M, Uno T, Zheng X, Kodama T, Ohashi Y. Marx line:
fluorescein staining line on the inner lid as indicator of meibomian gland
function. Am J Ophthalmol 2006;141:669e75.
[455] (a) Rottach KG, Das VE, Wohlgemuth W, Zivotofsky AZ, Leigh RJ. Properties of
horizontal saccades accompanied by blinks. J Neurophysiol 1998;79:
2895e902.
(b) Yamamoto Y, Shiraishi A, Sakane Y, Ohta K, Yamaguchi M, Ohashi Y.
Involvement of Eyelid Pressure in Lid-Wiper Epitheliopathy. Curr Eye Res
2016;41(2):171e8.
[456] de Paiva CS, Chotikavanich S, Pangelinan SB, Pitcher III JD, Fang B, Zheng X,
et al. IL-17 disrupts corneal barrier following desiccating stress. Mucosal
Immunol 2009;2:243e53.
[457] Streilein JW. Ocular immune privilege: the eye takes a dim but practical view
of immunity and inflammation. J Leukoc Biol 2003;74:179e85.
[458] Lam H, Bleiden L, de Paiva CS, Farley W, Stern ME, Pflugfelder SC. Tear
cytokine profiles in dysfunctional tear syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol
2009;147:198e205. e191.
[459] Jensen OL, Gluud BS, Birgens HS. The concentration of lactoferrin in tears of
normals and of diabetics. Acta Ophthalmol(Copenh) 1986;64:83e7.
[460] Vinding T, Eriksen JS, Nielsen NV. The concentration of lysozyme and
secretory IgA in tears from healthy persons with and without contact lens
use. Acta Ophthalmol(Copenh) 1987;65:23e6.
[461] Zhou L, Huang LQ, Beuerman RW, Grigg ME, Li SF, Chew FT, et al. Proteomic
analysis of human tears: defensin expression after ocular surface surgery. J
Proteom Res 2004;3:410e6.
[462] Ueta M. Innate immunity of the ocular surface and ocular surface inflam￾matory disorders. Cornea 2008;27(Suppl 1):S31e40.
[463] Simmons KT, Xiao Y, Pflugfelder SC, de Paiva CS. Inflammatory Response to
Lipopolysaccharide on the Ocular Surface in a Murine Dry Eye Model. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2016;57:2443e51.
[464] Springer TA. Adhesion receptors of the immune system. Nature 1990;346:
425e34.
[465] Narayanan S, Corrales RM, Farley W, McDermott AM, Pflugfelder SC. Inter￾leukin-1 receptor-1-deficient mice show attenuated production of ocular
surface inflammatory cytokines in experimental dry eye. Cornea 2008;27:
811e7.
[466] Yoon KC, Jeong IY, Park YG, Yang SY. Interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor￾alpha levels in tears of patients with dry eye syndrome. Cornea 2007;26:
431e7.
[467] Yoon KC, Park CS, You IC, Choi HJ, Lee KH, Im SK, et al. Expression of CXCL9,
-10, -11, and CXCR3 in the tear film and ocular surface of patients with dry
eye syndrome. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51:643e50.
[468] Choi W, Li Z, Oh HJ, Im SK, Lee SH, Park SH, et al. Expression of CCR5 and its
ligands CCL3, -4, and -5 in the tear film and ocular surface of patients with
dry eye disease. Curr Eye Res 2012;37:12e7.
[469] Carreno E, Enriquez-de-Salamanca A, Teson M, Garcia-Vazquez C, Stern ME,
Whitcup SM, et al. Cytokine and chemokine levels in tears from healthy
subjects. Acta Ophthalmol 2010;88:e250e258.
[470] Zlotnick A, Mitchell RS, Brenner SL. recA protein filaments bind two mole￾cules of single-stranded DNA with off rates regulated by nucleotide cofactor.
J Biol Chem 1990;265:17050e4.
[471] Pisella PJ, Brignole F, Debbasch C, Lozato PA, Creuzot-Garcher C, Bara J, et al.
Flow cytometric analysis of conjunctival epithelium in ocular rosacea and
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Ophthalmology 2000;107:1841e9.
[472] Perez VL, Pflugfelder SC, Zhang S, Shojaei A, Haque R. Lifitegrast, a novel
integrin antagonist for treatment of dry eye disease. Ocul Surf 2016;14:
207e15.
[473] https://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/
ucm510720.htm.
[474] Gao Y, Min K, Zhang Y, Su J, Greenwood M, Gronert K. Female-specific
downregulation of tissue polymorphonuclear neutrophils drives impaired
regulatory T cell and amplified effector T cell responses in autoimmune dry
eye disease. J Immunol 2015;195:3086e99.
[475] Coursey TG, Bohat R, Barbosa FL, Pflugfelder SC, de Paiva CS. Desiccating
stress-induced chemokine expression in the epithelium is dependent on
upregulation of NKG2D/RAE-1 and release of IFN-gamma in experimental
dry eye. J Immunol 2014;193:5264e72.
[476] Zhang X, Volpe EA, Gandhi NB, Schaumburg CS, Siemasko KF, Pangelinan SB,
et al. NK cells promote Th-17 mediated corneal barrier disruption in dry eye.
PLoS One 2012;7. e36822.
[477] (a) Chen Y, et al. Interferon-gamma-secreting NK cells promote induction of
dry eye disease. J Leukoc Biol 2011;89(6):965e72.
(b) Chen Q, Zhang X, Cui L, Huang Q, Chen W, Ma H, et al. Upper and lower
tear menisci in Sjogren's syndrome dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2011;52:9373e8.
[478] De Paiva CS, Villarreal AL, Corrales RM, Rahman HT, Chang VY, Farley WJ,
et al. Dry eye-induced conjunctival epithelial squamous metaplasia is
modulated by interferon-gamma. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48:
2553e60.
[479] Schaumburg CS, Siemasko KF, De Paiva CS, Wheeler LA, Niederkorn JY,
Pflugfelder SC, et al. Ocular surface APCs are necessary for autoreactive T
cell-mediated experimental autoimmune lacrimal keratoconjunctivitis. J
Immunol 2011;187:3653e62.
[480] You IC, Coursey TG, Bian F, Barbosa FL, de Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC. Macro￾phage phenotype in the ocular surface of experimental murine dry eye
disease. Arch Immunol Ther Exp Warsz 2015;63:299e304.
[481] Bialasiewicz AA, Schaudig U, Ma JX, Vieth S, Richard G. Alpha/beta- and
gamma/delta-T-cell-receptor-positive lymphocytes in healthy and inflamed
human conjunctiva. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1996;234:467e71.
[482] Stern ME, Schaumburg CS, Siemasko KF, Gao J, Wheeler LA, Grupe DA, et al.
Autoantibodies contribute to the immunopathogenesis of experimental dry
eye disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:2062e75.
[483] Kunert KS, Tisdale AS, Stern ME, Smith JA, Gipson IK. Analysis of topical
cyclosporine treatment of patients with dry eye syndrome: effect on
conjunctival lymphocytes. Arch Ophthalmol 2000;118:1489e96.
[484] Bacman S, Berra A, Sterin-Borda L, Borda E. Muscarinic acetylcholine re￾ceptor antibodies as a new marker of dry eye Sjogren's syndrome. Invest €
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:321e7.
[485] Takada K, Takiguchi M, Konno A, Inaba M. Autoimmunity against a tissue
kallikrein in IQI/Jic Mice: a model for Sjogren's syndrome. J Biol Chem
2005;280:3982e8.
[486] Jiang G, Ke Y, Sun D, Li H, Ihnen M, Jumblatt MM, et al. A new model of
experimental autoimmune keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) induced in Lewis
rat by the autoantigen Klk1b22. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;50:
2245e54.
[487] Niederkorn JY, Stern ME, Pflugfelder SC, De Paiva CS, Corrales RM, Gao J, et al.
Desiccating stress induces T cell-mediated Sjogren's Syndrome-like lacrimal
keratoconjunctivitis. J Immunol 2006;176:3950e7.
[488] Stern ME, Gao J, Schwalb TA, Ngo M, Tieu DD, Chan CC, et al. Conjunctival T￾cell subpopulations in Sjogren's and non-Sjogren's patients with dry eye.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002;43:2609e14.
[489] Herretes S, Ross DB, Duffort S, Barreras H, Tan Y, Murillo JC, et al. Recruit￾ment of Donor T Cells to the Eyes during Ocular GVHD in Recipients of MHC￾Matched Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplants. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 56, 2015, 2348-2357.
[490] Siebelmann S, Gehlsen U, Huttmann G, Koop N, Bolke T, Gebert A, et al.
Development, alteration and real time dynamics of conjunctiva-associated
lymphoid tissue. PLoS One 2013;8. e82355.
[491] Knop E, Knop N. Influence of the eye-associated lymphoid tissue (EALT) on
inflammatory ocular surface disease. Ocul Surf 2005;3:S180e6.
[492] Steven P, Rupp J, Huttmann G, Koop N, Lensing C, Laqua H, et al. Experi￾mental induction and three-dimensional two-photon imaging of conjunc￾tiva-associated lymphoid tissue. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:1512e7.
[493] Steven P, Gebert A. Conjunctiva-associated lymphoid tissue - current
knowledge, animal models and experimental prospects. Ophthalmic Res
2009;42:2e8.
[494] Gutgesell VJ, Stern GA, Hood CI. Histopathology of meibomian gland
dysfunction. Am J Ophthalmol 1982;94:383e7.
[495] Obata H, Horiuchi H, Miyata K, Tsuru T, Machinami R. Histopathological
study of the meibomian glands in 72 autopsy cases. Nippon Ganka Gakkai
Zasshi 1994;98:765e71.
[496] Sahin A, Kam WR, Rahimi Darabad R, Liu Y, Sullivan DA. Influence of lipo￾polysaccharide on proinflammatory gene expression in human corneal,
conjunctival and meibomian gland epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2017. ARVO abstract #3946.
[497] Meyaard L. The inhibitory collagen receptor LAIR-1 (CD305). J Leukoc Biol
2008;83:799e803.
[498] Omiya R, Tsushima F, Narazaki H, Sakoda Y, Kuramasu A, Kim Y, et al. Leu￾cocyte-associated immunoglobulin-like receptor-1 is an inhibitory regulator
of contact hypersensitivity. Immunology 2009;128:543e55.
[499] Qu XD, Lehrer RI. Secretory phospholipase A2 is the principal bactericide for
staphylococci and other gram-positive bacteria in human tears. Infect
Immun 1998;66:2791e7.
[500] Hieshima K, Ohtani H, Shibano M, Izawa D, Nakayama T, Kawasaki Y, et al.
CCL28 has dual roles in mucosal immunity as a chemokine with broad￾spectrum antimicrobial activity. J Immunol 2003;170:1452e61.
[501] Davis RSK, Sullivan DA, Liu Y. Inhibitory effect of human meibomian gland
epithelial cells on the growth rate of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. (abstract).
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2016. ARVO Abstract #5705.
[502] Perera C, McNeil HP, Geczy CL. S100 Calgranulins in inflammatory arthritis.
Immunol Cell Biol 2010;88:41e9.
[503] Hsu K, Champaiboon C, Guenther BD, Sorenson BS, Khammanivong A,
Ross KF, et al. Anti-infective protective properties of S100 calgranulins.
Antiinflamm Antiallergy Agents Med Chem 2009;8:290e305.
[504] Champaiboon C, Sappington KJ, Guenther BD, Ross KF, Herzberg MC. Cal￾protectin S100A9 calcium-binding loops I and II are essential for keratino￾cyte resistance to bacterial invasion. J Biol Chem 2009;284:7078e90.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 497
[505] Liu S, Richards SM, Lo K, Hatton M, Fay A, Sullivan DA. Changes in gene
expression in human meibomian gland dysfunction. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2011;52:2727e40.
[506] Nelson JD, Shimazaki J, Benitez-del-Castillo JM, et al. The international
workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of the definition and
classification subcommittee. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:1930e7.
[507] Schrader S, Mircheff AK, Geerling G. Animal models of dry eye. In:
Geerling G, Brewitt H, editors. Surgery for the Dry eye. Freiburg: Karger;
2008. p. 298e312.
[508] Dursun D, Wang M, Monroy D, Li DQ, Lokeshwar BL, Stern ME, et al. A mouse
model of keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002;43:
632e8.
[509] Barabino S, Shen L, Chen L, Rashid S, Rolando M, Dana MR. The controlled￾environment chamber: a new mouse model of dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2005;46:2766e71.
[510] Chen W, Zhang X, Zhang J, Chen J, Wang S, Wang Q, et al. A murine model of
dry eye induced by an intelligently controlled environmental system. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:1386e91.
[511] Lee HS, Chauhan SK, Okanobo A, Nallasamy N, Dana R. Therapeutic efficacy of
topical epigallocatechin gallate in murine dry eye. Cornea 2011;30:1465e72.
[512] Goyal S, Chauhan SK, Dana R. Blockade of prolymphangiogenic vascular
endothelial growth factor C in dry eye disease. Arch Ophthalmol 2012;130:
84e9.
[513] Sadrai Z, Stevenson W, Okanobo A, Chen Y, Dohlman TH, Hua J, et al. PDE4
inhibition suppresses IL-17-associated immunity in dry eye disease. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:3584e91.
[514] de Paiva CS, Schwartz CE, Gjorstrup P, Pflugfelder SC. Resolvin E1 (RX-10001)
reduces corneal epithelial barrier disruption and protects against goblet cell
loss in a murine model of dry eye. Cornea 2012;31:1299e303.
[515] Krauss AH, Corrales RM, Pelegrino FS, Tukler-Henriksson J, Pflugfelder SC, de
Paiva CS. Improvement of Outcome Measures of Dry Eye by a Novel Integrin
Antagonist in the Murine Desiccating Stress Model. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2015;56:5888e95.
[516] De Paiva CS, Yoon KC, Pangelinan SB, Pham S, Puthenparambil LM,
Chuang EY, et al. Cleavage of functional IL-2 receptor alpha chain (CD25)
from murine corneal and conjunctival epithelia by MMP-9. J Inflamm (Lond)
2009;6:31.
[517] Corrales RM, Stern ME, De Paiva CS, Welch J, Li DQ, Pflugfelder SC. Desic￾cating stress stimulates expression of matrix metalloproteinases by the
corneal epithelium. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:3293e302.
[518] Coursey TG, Tukler Henriksson J, Chen M, de Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC. IFN-g
induced unfolded Protein Response in Conjunctival Goblet Cells as Cause of
Mucin Deficiency in Sjogren € ’s Syndrome. Am J Pathol 2016;186:1547e58.
[519] Pflugfelder SC, Farley W, Luo L, Chen LZ, de Paiva CS, Olmos LC, et al. Matrix
metalloproteinase-9 knockout confers resistance to corneal epithelial barrier
disruption in experimental dry eye. Am J Pathol 2005;166:61e71.
[520] de Paiva CS, Pangelinan SB, Chang E, Yoon KC, Farley WJ, Li DQ, et al.
Essential role for c-Jun N-terminal kinase 2 in corneal epithelial response to
desiccating stress. Arch Ophthalmol 2009;127:1625e31.
[521] Stevenson W, Chauhan SK, Dana R. Dry eye disease: an immune-mediated
ocular surface disorder. Arch Ophthalmol 2012;130:90e100.
[522] Chen Y, Chauhan SK, Saban DR, Sadrai Z, Okanobo A, Dana R. Interferon￾gamma-secreting NK cells promote induction of dry eye disease. J Leukoc
Biol 2011;89:965e72.
[523] Chauhan SK, Jin Y, Goyal S, Lee HS, Fuchsluger TA, Lee HK, et al. A novel pro￾lymphangiogenic function for Th17/IL-17. Blood 2011;118:4630e4.
[524] Goyal S, Chauhan SK, El Annan J, Nallasamy N, Zhang Q, Dana R. Evidence of
corneal lymphangiogenesis in dry eye disease: a potential link to adaptive
immunity? Arch Ophthalmol 2010;128:819e24.
[525] El Annan J, Chauhan SK, Ecoiffier T, Zhang Q, Saban DR, Dana R. Character￾ization of effector T cells in dry eye disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2009;50:3802e7.
[526] Chauhan SK, Dana R. Role of Th17 cells in the immunopathogenesis of dry
eye disease. Mucosal Immunol 2009;2:375e6.
[527] Coursey TG, Gandhi NB, Volpe EA, Pflugfelder SC, de Paiva CS. Chemokine
receptors CCR6 and CXCR3 are necessary for CD4(þ) T cell mediated ocular
surface disease in experimental dry eye disease. PLoS One 2013;8. e78508.
[528] Dohlman TH, Chauhan SK, Kodati S, Hua J, Chen Y, Omoto M, et al. The CCR6/
CCL20 axis mediates Th17 cell migration to the ocular surface in dry eye
disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:4081e91.
[529] Chauhan SK, El AJ, Ecoiffier T, Goyal S, Zhang Q, Saban DR, et al. Autoim￾munity in dry eye is due to resistance of Th17 to Treg suppression. J
Immunol 2009;182:1247e52.
[530] Zhang X, Chen W, De Paiva CS, Corrales RM, Volpe EA, McClellan AJ, et al.
Interferon-gamma exacerbates dry eye-induced apoptosis in conjunctiva
through dual apoptotic pathways. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:
6279e85.
[531] Yoon KC, De Paiva CS, Qi H, Chen Z, Farley WJ, Li DQ, et al. Expression of Th-1
chemokines and chemokine receptors on the ocular surface of C57BL/6 mice:
effects of desiccating stress. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48:2561e9.
[532] Pflugfelder SC, De Paiva CS, Moore QL, Volpe EA, Li DQ, Gumus K, et al.
Aqueous tear deficiency increases conjunctival interferon-gamma (IFN￾gamma) expression and goblet cell loss. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:
7545e50.
[533] Niederkorn JY, Stevens C, Mellon J, Mayhew E. CD4þ T-cell-independent
rejection of corneal allografts. Transplantation 2006;81:1171e8.
[534] Rodriguez-Pinto D, Moreno J. B cells can prime naive CD4þ T cells in vivo in
the absence of other professional antigen-presenting cells in a CD154-CD40-
dependent manner. Eur J Immunol 2005;35:1097e105.
[535] Dursun D, Wang M, Monroy D, Li DQ, Lokeshwar BL, Stern M, et al. Experi￾mentally induced dry eye produces ocular surface inflammation and
epithelial disease. Adv Exp Med Biol 2002;506:647e55.
[536] Pelegrino FS, Volpe EA, Gandhi NB, Li DQ, Pflugfelder SC, de Paiva CS.
Deletion of interferon-gamma delays onset and severity of dacryoadenitis in
CD25KO mice. Arthritis Res Ther 2012;14. R234.
[537] Chen Y, Chauhan SK, Lee HS, Stevenson W, Schaumburg CS, Sadrai Z, et al.
Effect of desiccating environmental stress versus systemic muscarinic AChR
blockade on dry eye immunopathogenesis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2013;54:2457e64.
[538] Gallowitsch-Puerta M, Pavlov VA. Neuro-immune interactions via the
cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway. Life Sci 2007;80:2325e9.
[539] Mitchelson F. Muscarinic receptor agonists and antagonists: effects on ocular
function. Handb Exp Pharmacol 2012:263e98.
[540] Toshida H, Beuerman RW. Effects of preganglionic parasympathetic dener￾vation on the rabbit lacrimation. Adv Exp Med Biol 2002;506(Pt A):225e9.
[541] Chen Y, Zhang X, Yang L, Li M, Li B, Wang W, et al. Decreased PPAR-gamma
expression in the conjunctiva and increased expression of TNF-alpha and IL-
1beta in the conjunctiva and tear fluid of dry eye mice. Mol Med Rep 2014;9:
2015e23.
[542] Chen Y, Chauhan SK, Lee HS, Saban DR, Dana R. Chronic dry eye disease is
principally mediated by effector memory Th17 cells. Mucosal Immunol
2014;7:38e45.
[543] Choi W, Lian C, Ying L, Kim GE, You IC, Park SH, et al. Expression of Lipid
Peroxidation Markers in the Tear Film and Ocular Surface of Patients with
Non-Sjogren Syndrome: Potential Biomarkers for Dry Eye Disease. Curr Eye
Res 2016:1e7.
[544] (a) Lee YB, et al. Eyelid tattooing induces meibomian gland loss and tear film
instability. Cornea 2015;34(7):750e5.
(b) Blackie CA, Korb DR. A novel lid seal evaluation: the Korb-Blackie light
test. Eye Contact Lens 2015;41:98e100.
[545] McClellan AJ, Volpe EA, Zhang X, Darlington GJ, Li DQ, Pflugfelder SC, et al.
Ocular surface disease and dacryoadenitis in aging C57BL/6 mice. Am J Pathol
2014;184:631e43.
[546] Seok J, Warren HS, Cuenca AG, Mindrinos MN, Baker HV, Xu W, et al.
Genomic responses in mouse models poorly mimic human inflammatory
diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:3507e12.
[547] Shoda LK, Young DL, Ramanujan S, Whiting CC, Atkinson MA, Bluestone JA,
et al. A comprehensive review of interventions in the NOD mouse and im￾plications for translation. Immunity 2005;23:115e26.
[548] Takao K, Miyakawa T. Genomic responses in mouse models greatly mimic
human inflammatory diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015;112:1167e72.
[549] Chao W, Belmonte C, Benitez Del Castillo JM, Bron AJ, Dua HS, Nichols KK,
et al. Report of the Inaugural Meeting of the TFOS i
2 ¼ initiating innovation
Series: Targeting the Unmet Need for Dry Eye Treatment. Ocul Surf 2016;14:
264e316.
[550] Sosne G, Kim C, Kleinman HK. Thymosin beta4 significantly reduces the signs
of dryness in a murine controlled adverse environment model of experi￾mental dry eye. Expert Opin Biol Ther 2015;15(Suppl 1):S155e61.
[551a] Lekhanont K, Park CY, Smith JA, Combs JC, Preechawat P, Suwan-Apichon O,
et al. Effects of topical anti-inflammatory agents in a botulinum toxin B￾induced mouse model of keratoconjunctivitis sicca. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther
2007 Feb;23(1):27e34.
[552] Shay T, Lederer JA, Benoist C. Genomic responses to inflammation in mouse
models mimic humans: we concur, apples to oranges comparisons won't do.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015;112. E346.
[553] Ariga H, Edwards J, Sullivan DA. Androgen control of autoimmune expres￾sion in lacrimal glands of MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr mice. Clin Immunol Immunopa￾thol 1989;53:499e508.
[554] Vendramini AC, Soo C, Sullivan DA. Testosterone-induced suppression of
autoimmune disease in lacrimal tissue of a mouse model (NZB/NZW F1) of
Sjogren's syndrome. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1991;32:3002e6.
[555] Toda I, Wickham LA, Sullivan DA. Gender and androgen treatment influence
the expression of proto-oncogenes and apoptotic factors in lacrimal and
salivary tissues of MRL/lpr mice. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1998;86:
59e71.
[556] Toda I, Sullivan BD, Rocha EM, Da Silveira LA, Wickham LA, Sullivan DA.
Impact of gender on exocrine gland inflammation in mouse models of
Sjogren's syndrome. Exp Eye Res 1999;69:355e66.
[557] Schaumberg DA, Dana R, Buring JE, Sullivan DA. Prevalence of dry eye dis￾ease among US men: estimates from the Physicians' Health Studies. Arch
Ophthalmol 2009;127:763e8.
[558] Galor A, Feuer W, Lee DJ, Florez H, Carter D, Pouyeh B, et al. Prevalence and
risk factors of dry eye syndrome in a United States veterans affairs popula￾tion. Am J Ophthalmol 2011;152:377e84. e2.
[559] Guillon M, Maissa C. Tear film evaporationeeffect of age and gender. Cont
Lens Anterior Eye 2010;33:171e5.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 498
[560] Guo B, Lu P, Chen X, Zhang W, Chen R. Prevalence of dry eye disease in
Mongolians at high altitude in China: the Henan eye study. Ophthalmic
Epidemiol 2010;17:234e41.
[561] Gupta N, Prasad I, Jain R, D'Souza P. Estimating the prevalence of dry eye
among Indian patients attending a tertiary ophthalmology clinic. Ann Trop
Med Parasitol 2010;104:247e55.
[562] Bian F, Barbosa FL, Corrales RM, Pelegrino FS, Volpe EA, Pflugfelder SC, et al.
Altered balance of interleukin-13/interferon-gamma contributes to lacrimal
gland destruction and secretory dysfunction in CD25 knockout model of
Sjogren's syndrome. Arthritis Res Ther 2015;17:53.
[563] Turpie B, Yoshimura T, Gulati A, Rios JD, Dartt DA, Masli S. Sjogren's syn￾drome-like ocular surface disease in thrombospondin-1 deficient mice. Am J
Pathol 2009;175:1136e47.
[564] Coursey TG, Bian F, Pflugfelder SC, De Paiva CS. Spontaneous lacrimal kera￾toconjunctivitis in aged NOD.B10.H2b mice is accompanied by dysfunctional
T regulatory cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:334.
[565] Shiboski SC, Shiboski CH, Criswell L, Baer A, Challacombe S, Lanfranchi H,
et al. American College of Rheumatology classification criteria for Sjogren's
syndrome: a data-driven, expert consensus approach in the Sjogren's In￾ternational Collaborative Clinical Alliance cohort. Arthritis Care Res Hob
2012;64:475e87.
[566] Schaumberg DA, Sullivan DA, Buring JE, Dana MR. Prevalence of dry eye
syndrome among US women. Am J Ophthalmol 2003;136:318e26.
[567] Uchino M, Dogru M, Uchino Y, Fukagawa K, Shimmura S, Takebayashi T, et al.
Japan Ministry of Health study on prevalence of dry eye disease among
Japanese high school students. Am J Ophthalmol 2008;146:925e9. e2.
[568] Hunger RE, Carnaud C, Vogt I, Mueller C. Male gonadal environment para￾doxically promotes dacryoadenitis in nonobese diabetic mice. J Clin Invest
1998;101:1300e9.
[569] Toda I, Sullivan BD, Wickham LA, Sullivan DA. Gender- and androgen-related
influence on the expression of proto-oncogene and apoptotic factor mRNAs
in lacrimal glands of autoimmune and non-autoimmune mice. J Steroid
Biochem Mol Biol 1999;71:49e61.
[570] Darabad RR, Richards SM, Sullivan DA. Sex and androgen effects on gene
expression in autoimmune lacrimal glands. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010.
ARVO abstract #4177.
[571] Brito-Zeron P, Theander E, Baldini C, Seror R, Retamozo S, Quartuccio L, et al.
Early diagnosis of primary Sjogren's syndrome: EULAR-SS task force clinical
recommendations. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 2016;12:137e56.
[572] Jabs DA, Lee B, Whittum-Hudson JA, Prendergast RA. Th1 versus Th2 immune
responses in autoimmune lacrimal gland disease in MRL/Mp mice. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:826e31.
[573] Van Blokland SC, Versnel MA. Pathogenesis of Sjogren's syndrome: charac￾teristics of different mouse models for autoimmune exocrinopathy. Clin
Immunol 2002;103:111e24.
[574] Jabs DA, Prendergast RA. Autoimmune ocular disease in MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr
mice is suppressed by anti-CD4 antibody. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1991;32:
2718e22.
[575] Jie G, Jiang Q, Rui Z, Yifei Y. Expression of interleukin-17 in autoimmune
dacryoadenitis in MRL/lpr mice. Curr Eye Res 2010;35:865e71.
[576] Diebold Y, Chen LL, Tepavcevic V, Ferdman D, Hodges RR, Dartt DA. Lym￾phocytic infiltration and goblet cell marker alteration in the conjunctiva of
the MRL/MpJ-Fas(lpr) mouse model of Sjogren's syndrome. Exp Eye Res
2007;84:500e12.
[577] Sun B, Rizzo LV, Sun SH, Chan CC, Wiggert B, Wilder RL, et al. Genetic sus￾ceptibility to experimental autoimmune uveitis involves more than a pre￾disposition to generate a T helper-1-like or a T helper-2-like response. J
Immunol 1997;159:1004e11.
[578] Rios JD, Horikawa Y, Chen LL, Kublin CL, Hodges RR, Dartt DA, et al. Age￾dependent alterations in mouse exorbital lacrimal gland structure, inner￾vation and secretory response. Exp Eye Res 2005;80:477e91.
[579] de Paiva CS, Rocha EM. Sjogren syndrome: what and where are we looking
for? Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2015;26:517e25.
[580] Zhou D, Chen YT, Chen F, Gallup M, Vijmasi T, Bahrami AF, et al. Critical
involvement of macrophage infiltration in the development of Sjogren's
syndrome-associated dry eye. Am J Pathol 2012;181:753e60.
[581] de Paiva CS, Hwang CS, Pitcher III JD, Pangelinan SB, Rahimy E, Chen W, et al.
Age-related T-cell cytokine profile parallels corneal disease severity in
Sjogren's syndrome-like keratoconjunctivitis sicca in CD25KO mice. Rheu￾matology 2010;49:246e58.
[582] Rahimy E, Pitcher 3rd JD, Pangelinan SB, Chen W, Farley WJ, Niederkorn JY,
et al. Spontaneous autoimmune dacryoadenitis in aged CD25KO mice. Am J
Pathol 2010;177:744e53.
[583] Chistiakov DA, Voronova NV, Chistiakov PA. The crucial role of IL-2/IL-2RA￾mediated immune regulation in the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes, an
evidence coming from genetic and animal model studies. Immunol Lett
2008;118:1e5.
[584] Willerford DMCJ, Ferry JA, Davidson L, Ma A, Alt FW. Interleukin-2 receptor
alpha chain regulates the size and content of the peripheral lymphoid
compartment. Immunity 1995;3:521e30.
[585] Waldmann TA. The biology of interleukin-2 and interleukin-15: implications
for cancer therapy and vaccine design. Nat Rev Immunol 2006;6:595e601.
[586] Sharma R, Bagavant H, Jarjour WN, Sung SS, Ju ST. The role of Fas in the
immune system biology of IL-2R alpha knockout mice: interplay among
regulatory T cells, inflammation, hemopoiesis, and apoptosis. J Immunol
2005;175:1965e73.
[587] Refaeli Y, Van PL, London CA, Tschopp J, Abbas AK. Biochemical mechanisms
of IL-2-regulated Fas-mediated T cell apoptosis. Immunity 1998;8:615e23.
[588] Vijmasi T, Chen FY, Chen YT, Gallup M, McNamara N. Topical administration
of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist as a therapy for aqueous-deficient dry
eye in autoimmune disease. Mol Vis 2013;19:1957e65.
[589] Chen YT, Nikulina K, Lazarev S, Bahrami AF, Noble LB, Gallup M, et al.
Interleukin-1 as a phenotypic immunomodulator in keratinizing squamous
metaplasia of the ocular surface in Sjogren's syndrome. Am J Pathol
2010;177:1333e43.
[590] Yeh S, de Paiva CS, Hwang CS, Trinca K, Lingappan A, Rafati JK, et al. Spon￾taneous T cell mediated keratoconjunctivitis in Aire-deficient mice. Br J
Ophthalmol 2009;93:1260e4.
[591] Nguyen CQ, Yin H, Lee BH, Chiorini JA, Peck AB. IL17: potential therapeutic
target in Sjogren's syndrome using adenovirus-mediated gene transfer. Lab
Invest 2011;91:54e62.
[592] Caspi RR, Chan CC, Grubbs BG, Silver PB, Wiggert B, Parsa CF, et al. Endog￾enous systemic IFN-gamma has a protective role against ocular autoimmu￾nity in mice. J Immunol 1994;152:890e9.
[593] Cha S, Brayer J, Gao J, Brown V, Killedar S, Yasunari U, et al. A dual role for
interferon-gamma in the pathogenesis of Sjogren's syndrome-like autoim￾mune exocrinopathy in the nonobese diabetic mouse. Scand J Immunol
2004;60:552e65.
[594] Wan YY, Flavell RA. Regulatory T cells, transforming growth factor-beta, and
immune suppression. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2007;4:271e6.
[595] Bettelli E, Carrier Y, Gao W, Korn T, Strom TB, Oukka M, et al. Reciprocal
developmental pathways for the generation of pathogenic effector TH17 and
regulatory T cells. Nature 2006;441:235e8.
[596] McCartney-Francis NL, Mizel DE, Frazier-Jessen M, Kulkarni AB, McCarthy JB,
Wahl SM. Lacrimal gland inflammation is responsible for ocular pathology in
TGF-beta 1 null mice. Am J Pathol 1997;151:1281e8.
[597] McCartney-Francis NL, Mizel DE, Redman RS, Frazier-Jessen M, Panek RB,
Kulkarni AB, et al. Autoimmune Sjogren's-like lesions in salivary glands of
TGF-beta1-deficient mice are inhibited by adhesion-blocking peptides. J
Immunol 1996;157:1306e12.
[598] Shull MM, Doetschman T. Transforming growth factor-a1 in reproduction 
and development. Mol Reprod Dev 1994;39:239e46.
[599] Contreras-Ruiz L, Regenfuss B, Mir FA, Kearns J, Masli S. Conjunctival
Inflammation in Thrombospondin-1 Deficient Mouse Model of Sjogren's
Syndrome. PLoS One 2013;8. e75937.
[600] Gandhi NB, Su Z, Zhang X, Volpe EA, Pelegrino FS, Rahman SA, et al. Dendritic
cell-derived thrombospondin-1 is critical for the generation of the ocular
surface Th17 response to desiccating stress. J Leukoc Biol 2013;94:
1293e301.
[601] Contreras-Ruiz L, Ryan DS, Sia RK, Bower KS, Dartt DA, Masli S. Poly￾morphism in THBS1 gene is associated with post-refractive surgery chronic
ocular surface inflammation. Ophthalmology 2014;121:1389e97.
[602] Okuma A, Hoshino K, Ohba T, Fukushi S, Aiba S, Akira S, et al. Enhanced
apoptosis by disruption of the STAT3-IkappaB-zeta signaling pathway in
epithelial cells induces Sjogren's syndrome-like autoimmune disease. Im￾munity 2013;38:450e60.
[603] Wu AJ, Chen ZJ, Tsokos M, O'Connell BC, Ambudkar IS, Baum BJ. Interferon￾gamma induced cell death in a cultured human salivary gland cell line. J Cell
Physiol 1996;167:297e304.
[604] Kamachi M, Kawakami A, Yamasaki S, Hida A, Nakashima T, Nakamura H,
et al. Regulation of apoptotic cell death by cytokines in a human salivary
gland cell line: distinct and synergistic mechanisms in apoptosis induced by
tumor necrosis factor alpha and interferon gamma. J Lab Clin Med 2002;139:
13e9.
[605] Coursey TG, Tukler Henriksson J, Barbosa FL, de Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC.
Interferon-gamma-Induced Unfolded Protein Response in Conjunctival
Goblet Cells as a Cause of Mucin Deficiency in Sjogren Syndrome. Am J Pathol
2016;186:1547e58.
[606] Garcia-Posadas L, Hodges RR, Li D, Shatos MA, Storr-Paulsen T, Diebold Y,
et al. Interaction of IFN-gamma with cholinergic agonists to modulate rat
and human goblet cell function. Mucosal Immunol 2016;9:206e17.
[607] Zulman J, Jaffe R, Talal N. Evidence that the malignant lymphoma of Sjogren's
syndrome is a monoclonal B-cell neoplasm. N Engl J Med 1978;299:
1215e20.
[608] Voulgarelis M, Ziakas PD, Papageorgiou A, Baimpa E, Tzioufas AG,
Moutsopoulos HM. Prognosis and outcome of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in
primary Sjogren syndrome. Med Baltim 2012;91:1e9.
[609] Kassan SS, Thomas TL, Moutsopoulos HM, Hoover R, Kimberly RP,
Budman DR, et al. Increased risk of lymphoma in sicca syndrome. Ann Intern
Med 1978;89:888e92.
[610] Whitcher JP, Shiboski CH, Shiboski SC, Heidenreich AM, Kitagawa K, Zhang S,
et al. A simplified quantitative method for assessing keratoconjunctivitis
sicca from the Sjogren's Syndrome International Registry. Am J Ophthalmol
2010;149:405e15.
[611] Groom J, Kalled SL, Cutler AH, Olson C, Woodcock SA, Schneider P, et al.
Association of BAFF/BLyS overexpression and altered B cell differentiation
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 499
with Sjogren's syndrome. J Clin Investig 2002;109:59e68.
[612] Qian Y, Giltiay N, Xiao J, Wang Y, Tian J, Han S, et al. Deficiency of Act1, a
critical modulator of B cell function, leads to development of Sjogren's
syndrome. Eur J Immunol 2008;38:2219e28.
[613] Brayer JB, Cha S, Nagashima H, Yasunari U, Lindberg A, Diggs S, et al. IL-4-
dependent effector phase in autoimmune exocrinopathy as defined by the
NOD.IL-4-gene knockout mouse model of Sjogren's syndrome. Scand J
Immunol 2001;54:133e40.
[614] Nguyen CQ, Gao JH, Kim H, Saban DR, Cornelius JG, Peck AB. IL-4-STAT6
signal transduction-dependent induction of the clinical phase of Sjogren's
syndrome-like disease of the nonobese diabetic mouse. J Immunol
2007;179:382e90.
[615] Iizuka M, Wakamatsu E, Tsuboi H, Nakamura Y, Hayashi T, Matsui M, et al.
Pathogenic role of immune response to M3 muscarinic acetylcholine re￾ceptor in Sjogren's syndrome-like sialoadenitis. J Autoimmun 2010;35:
383e9.
[616] Iizuka M, Tsuboi H, Matsuo N, Kondo Y, Asashima H, Matsui M, et al. The
crucial roles of IFN-gamma in the development of M3 muscarinic acetyl￾choline receptor induced Sjogren's syndrome-like sialadenitis. Mod Rheu￾matol 2013;23:614e6.
[617] Iizuka M, Tsuboi H, Asashima H, Hirota T, Kondo Y, Matsui M, et al. M3
muscarinic acetylcholine receptor reactive IL-17 producing T cells promotes
development of Sjogren's syndrome like sialadenitis. Mod Rheumatol
2015;25:158e60.
[618] Yoon KC, de Paiva CS, Qi H, Chen Z, Farley WJ, Li DQ, et al. Desiccating
environmental stress exacerbates autoimmune lacrimal keratoconjunctivitis
in non-obese diabetic mice. J Autoimmun 2008;30:212e21.
[619] Yoon KC, Ahn KY, Choi W, Li Z, Choi JS, Lee SH, et al. Tear production and
ocular surface changes in experimental dry eye after elimination of desic￾cating stress. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:7267e73.
[620] Knop E, Knop N. Meibomian glands : part IV. Functional interactions in the
pathogenesis of meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD). Ophthalmologe
2009;106:980e7.
[621] Knop E, Knop N, Brewitt H, Pleyer U, Rieck P, Seitz B, et al. Meibomian glands
: part III. Dysfunction - argument for a discrete disease entity and as an
important cause of dry eye. Ophthalmologe 2009;106:966e79.
[622] Krenzer KL, Dana MR, Ullman MD, Cermak JM, Tolls DB, Evans JE, et al. Effect
of androgen deficiency on the human meibomian gland and ocular surface. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2000;85:4874e82.
[623] Cermak JM, Krenzer KL, Sullivan RM, Dana MR, Sullivan DA. Is complete
androgen insensitivity syndrome associated with alterations in the meibo￾mian gland and ocular surface? Cornea 2003;22:516e21.
[624] Obata H. Anatomy and histopathology of human meibomian gland. Cornea
2002;21:S70e4.
[625] Jester JV, Nicolaides N, Smith RE. Meibomian gland studies: histologic and
ultrastructural investigations. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1981;20:537e47.
[626] Mathers WD, Lane JA. Meibomian gland lipids, evaporation, and tear film
stability. Adv Exp Med Biol 1998;438:349e60.
[627] Sullivan BD, Evans JE, Dana MR, Sullivan DA. Influence of aging on the polar
and neutral lipid profiles in human meibomian gland secretions. Arch
Ophthalmol 2006;124:1286e92.
[628] Sullivan DA, Yamagami H, Liu M, Steagall RJ, Schirra F, Suzuki T, et al. Sex
steroids, the meibomian gland and evaporative dry eye. Adv Exp Med Biol
2002;506:389e99.
[629] Driver PJ, Lemp MA. Meibomian gland dysfunction. Surv Ophthalmol
1996;40:343e67.
[630] Lemp MA. Report of the National Eye Institute/Industry workshop on Clinical
Trials in Dry Eyes. CLAO J 1995;21:221e32.
[631] Julio G, Merindano MD, Canals M, Caum C, Rallo M. Indicators of progressive
corneal exposure to dry eye conditions. Optom Vis Sci 2012;89:1042e9.
[632] Tseng SC. Staging of conjunctival squamous metaplasia by impression
cytology. Ophthalmology 1985;92:728e33.
[633] Ohnishi Y, Kohno T. Polychlorinated biphenyls poisoning in monkey eye.
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1979;18:981e4.
[634] Lambert R, Smith RE. Hyperkeratinization in a rabbit model of meibomian
gland dysfunction. Am J Ophthalmol 1988;105:703e5.
[635] Jester JV, Rife L, Nii D, Luttrull JK, Wilson L, Smith RE. In vivo biomicroscopy
and photography of meibomian glands in a rabbit model of meibomian gland
dysfunction. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1982;22:660e7.
[636] Nicolaides N, Santos EC, Smith RE, Jester JV. Meibomian gland dysfunction.
III. Meibomian gland lipids. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1989;30:946e51.
[637] Miyake H, Oda T, Katsuta O, Seno M, Nakamura M. Meibomian Gland
Dysfunction Model in Hairless Mice Fed a Special Diet With Limited Lipid
Content. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2016;57:3268e75.
[638] Liu Y, Ding J. The combined effect of azithromycin and insulin-like growth
factor-1 on cultured human meibomian gland epithelial cells. Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:5596e601.
[639] Liu Y, Kam WR, Ding J, Sullivan DA. Effect of azithromycin on lipid accu￾mulation in immortalized human meibomian gland epithelial cells. JAMA
Ophthalmol 2014;132:226e8.
[640] Liu Y, Kam WR, Ding J, Sullivan DA. One man's poison is another man's meat:
using azithromycin-induced phospholipidosis to promote ocular surface
health. Toxicology 2014;320:1e5.
[641] Lemp MA, Nichols KK. Blepharitis in the United States 2009: A Survey-based
Perspective on Prevalence and Treatment. Ocul Surf 2009;7:S1e14.
[642] Ibrahim MAA, Elwan WM. Role of topical dehydroepiandrosterone in
ameliorating isotretinoin-induced Meibomian gland dysfunction in adult
male albino rat. Ann Anat 2017;211:78e87.
[643] Perry MD, McEvoy GK. Isotretinoin: new therapy for severe acne. Clin Pharm
1983;2:12e9.
[644] Fraunfelder FT, LaBraico JM, Meyer SM. Adverse ocular reactions possibly
associated with isotretinoin. Am J Ophthalmol 1985;100:534e7.
[645] Fraunfelder FT, Fraunfelder FW, Edwards R. Ocular side effects possibly
associated with isotretinoin usage. Am J Ophthalmol 2001;132:299e305.
[646] Caffery BE, Josephson JE. Ocular side effects of isotretinoin therapy. J Am
Optom Assoc 1988;59:221e4.
[647] Denis P, Nordmann JP, Saiag P, Liotet S, Laroche L, Saraux H. Chronic ble￾pharoconjunctivitis during a treatment with acitretin (Soriatane). J Fr Oph￾talmol 1993;16:191e4.
[648] Mathers WD, Shields WJ, Sachdev MS, Petroll WM, Jester JV. Meibomian
gland morphology and tear osmolarity: changes with Accutane therapy.
Cornea 1991;10:286e90.
[649] Bozkurt B, Irke M, Atakan N, Orhan M, Geyik P. Lacrimal function and ocular
complications in patients treated with systemic isotretinoin. Eur J Oph￾thalmol 2002;12:173e6.
[650] Gross EG, Helfgott MA. Retinoids and the eye. Dermatol Clin 1992;10:
521e31.
[651] Jaanus SD. Ocular side effects of selected systemic drugs. Optom Clin 1992;2:
73e96.
[652] Egger SF, Huber-Spitzy V, Bohler K, Raff M, Scholda C, Barisani T, et al. Ocular
side effects associated with 13-cis-retinoic acid therapy for acne vulgaris:
clinical features, alterations of tearfilm and conjunctival flora. Acta Oph￾thalmol Scand 1995;73:355e7.
[653] Schiffman RM, Bradford R, Bunnell B, Lai F, Bernstein P, Whitcup SW.
A multi-center, double-masked, randomized, vehicle-controlled, parallel
group study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of testosterone ophthalmic
solution in patients with meibomian gland dysfunction (abstaract) Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006. ARVO e-abstract 5608.
[654] Jester JV, Parfitt GJ, Brown DJ. Meibomian gland dysfunction: hyper￾keratinization or atrophy? BMC Ophthalmol 2015;15(Suppl 1):156.
[655] Nien CJ, Paugh JR, Massei S, Wahlert AJ, Kao WW, Jester JV. Age-related
changes in the meibomian gland. Exp Eye Res 2009;89:1021e7.
[656] Suhalim JL, Parfitt GJ, Xie Y, De Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC, Shah TN, et al. Effect
of desiccating stress on mouse meibomian gland function. Ocul Surf
2014;12:59e68.
[657] Obata H, Oka T, Yoshitomi F. Impression cytology of meibomian gland
secretion. (abstract). Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002. ARVO poster E- 60.
[658] Iwata S, Lemp MA, Holly FJ, Dohlman CH. Evaporation rate of water from the
precorneal tear film and cornea in the rabbit. Investig Ophthalmol 1969;8:
613e9.
[659] Lee WB, Hamilton SM, Harris JP, Schwab IR. Ocular complications of hypo￾vitaminosis a after bariatric surgery. Ophthalmology 2005;112:1031e4.
[660] Yagyu H, Kitamine T, Osuga J, Tozawa R, Chen Z, Kaji Y, et al. Absence of
ACAT-1 attenuates atherosclerosis but causes dry eye and cutaneous xan￾thomatosis in mice with congenital hyperlipidemia. J Biol Chem 2000;275:
21324e30.
[661] Nolan J. Evaluation of conjunctival and nasal bacterial cultures before intra￾ocular operations. Br J Ophthalmol 1967;51:483e5.
[662] Schabereiter-Gurtner C, Maca S, Rolleke S, Nigl K, Lukas J, Hirschl A, et al. 16S
rDNA-based identification of bacteria from conjunctival swabs by PCR and
DGGE fingerprinting. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:1164e71.
[663] Haynes RJ, Tighe PJ, Dua HS. Antimicrobial defensin peptides of the human
ocular surface. Br J Ophthalmol 1999;83:737e41.
[664] Dong Q, Brulc JM, Iovieno A, Bates B, Garoutte A, Miller D, et al. Diversity of
bacteria at healthy human conjunctiva. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:
5408e13.
[665] Huang Y, Yang B, Li W. Defining the normal “core microbiome” of
conjunctival microbial communities. Clin Microbiol Infect 2016;22:
643.e7e643.e12.
[666] Moeller CT, Branco BC, Yu MC, Farah ME, Santos MA, Hofling-Lima AL.
Evaluation of normal ocular bacterial flora with two different culture media.
Can J Ophthalmol 2005;40:448e53.
[667] Willcox MDP. Characterization of the normal microbiota of the ocular sur￾face. Exp Eye Res 2013;117:99e105.
[668] de Paiva CS, Jones DB, Stern ME, Bian F, Moore QL, Corbiere S, et al. Altered
Mucosal Microbiome Diversity and Disease Severity in Sjogren Syndrome.
Sci Rep 2016;6:23561.
[669] Graham JE, Moore JE, Jiru X, Moore JE, Goodall EA, Dooley JSG, et al. Ocular
Pathogen or Commensal: A PCR-Based Study of Surface Bacterial Flora in
Normal and Dry Eyes. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48:5616e23.
[670] Albietz JM, Lenton LM. Effect of Antibacterial Honey on the Ocular Flora in
Tear Deficiency and Meibomian Gland Disease. Cornea 2006;25:1012e9.
[671] Terzulli M, Ruiz LC, Kugadas A, Masli S, Gadjeva M. TSP-1 Deficiency Alters
Ocular Microbiota: Implications for Sjogren's Syndrome Pathogenesis. J Ocul
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 500
Pharmacol Ther 2015;31:413e8.
[672] Wang CZM, Bian F, Britton RA, Pflugfelder SC, De Paiva CS. Sjogren-like
Lacrimal Keratoconjunctivits in Germ-Free Mice. ARVO Meeting. 2016.
[673] Spoler F, Frentz M, Schrage NF. Towards a new in vitro model of dry eye: the €
Ex Vivo Eye Irritation Test. Dev Ophthalmol 2010;45:93e107.
[674] Meloni M, De Servi B, Marasco D, Del Prete S. Molecular mechanism of ocular
surface damage: application to an in vitro dry eye model on human corneal
epithelium. Mol Vis 2011;17:113e26.
[675] Barabino S, De Servi B, Aragona S, Manenti D, Meloni M. Efficacy of a New
Ocular Surface Modulator in Restoring Epithelial Changes in an In Vitro
Model of Dry Eye Syndrome. Curr Eye Res 2017;42:358e63.
[676] Thompson N, Isenberg DA, Jury EC, Ciurtin C. Exploring BAFF: its expression,
receptors and contribution to the immunopathogenesis of Sjogren's syn￾drome. Rheumatol Oxf 2016;55:1548e55.
[677] Helmick CG, Felson DT, Lawrence RC, Gabriel S, Hirsch R, Kwoh CK, et al.
Estimates of the prevalence of arthritis and other rheumatic conditions in
the United States. Part I. Arthritis Rheum 2008;58:15e25.
[678] Jacobson DL, Gange SJ, Rose NR, Graham NM. Epidemiology and estimated
population burden of selected autoimmune diseases in the United States.
Clin Immunol Immunopathol 1997;84:223e43.
[679] Maciel G, Crowson CS, Matteson EL, Cornec D. Incidence and Mortality of
Physician-Diagnosed Primary Sjogren Syndrome: Time Trends Over a 40-
Year Period in a Population-Based US Cohort. Mayo Clin Proc 92, 2017, 734-
743.
[680] Maciel G, Crowson CS, Matteson EL, Cornec D. Prevalence of Primary Sjog￾ren's Syndrome in a Population-Based Cohort in the United States. Arthritis
Care Res Hob 2016 [Epub ahead of print].
[681] Yen JC, Hsu CA, Li YC, Hsu MH. The Prevalence of Dry Eye Syndrome's and the
Likelihood to Develop Sjogren's Syndrome in Taiwan: A Population-Based
Study. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2015;12:7647e55.
[682] Voulgarelis M, Tzioufas AG. Pathogenetic mechanisms in the initiation and
perpetuation of Sjogren's syndrome. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2010;6:529e37.
[683] Nocturne G, Mariette X. Advances in understanding the pathogenesis of
primary Sjogren's syndrome. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2013;9:544e56.
[684] Vitali C, Bombardieri S, Jonsson R, Moutsopoulos HM, Alexander EL,
Carsons SE, et al. Classification criteria for Sjogren's syndrome: a revised
version of the European criteria proposed by the American-European
Consensus Group. Ann Rheum Dis 2002;61:554e8.
[685] Aguilar AJ, Fonseca L, Croxatto JO. Sjogren's syndrome: a comparative study
of impression cytology of the conjunctiva and buccal mucosa, and salivary
gland biopsy. Cornea 1991;10:203e6.
[686] Raphael M, Bellefqih S, Piette JC, Le Hoang P, Debre P, Chomette G.
Conjunctival biopsy in Sjogren's syndrome: correlations between histologi￾cal and immunohistochemical features. Histopathology 1988;13:191e202.
[687] Pflugfelder SC, Jones D, Ji Z, Afonso A, Monroy D. Altered cytokine balance in
the tear fluid and conjunctiva of patients with Sjogren's syndrome kerato￾conjunctivitis sicca. Curr Eye Res 1999;19:201e11.
[688] Roberts DK. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca. J Am Optom Assoc 1991;62:187e99.
[689] Uchino M, Nishiwaki Y, Michikawa T, Shirakawa K, Kuwahara E, Yamada M,
et al. Prevalence and Risk Factors of Dry Eye Disease in Japan: Koumi Study.
Ophthalmology 2011;118:2361e7.
[690] Sullivan DA. Tearful relationships? Sex, hormones, the lacrimal gland, and
aqueous-deficient dry eye. Ocul Surf 2004;2:92e123.
[691] Darabad RR, Suzuki T, Richards SM, Jensen RV, Jakobiec FA, Zakka FR, et al.
Influence of aromatase absence on the gene expression and histology of the
mouse meibomian gland. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:987e98.
[692] Rahimi Darabad R, Suzuki T, Richards SM, Jakobiec FA, Zakka FR, Barabino S,
et al. Does estrogen deficiency cause lacrimal gland inflammation and
aqueous-deficient dry eye in mice? Exp Eye Res 2014;127:153e60.
[693] Li L, Kang Q, Wang S, Zheng X. Effects of androgen on ultrastructure of
corneal epithelium and function of the tear film in BALB/c mice. Cornea
2015;34:334e41.
[694] Lessard CJ, Li H, Adrianto I, Ice JA, Rasmussen A, Grundahl KM, et al. Variants
at multiple loci implicated in both innate and adaptive immune responses
are associated with Sjogren's syndrome. Nat Genet 2013;45:1284e92.
[695] Burbelo PD, Ambatipudi K, Alevizos I. Genome-wide association studies in
Sjogren's syndrome: What do the genes tell us about disease pathogenesis?
Autoimmun Rev 2014;13:756e61.
[696] Carragher DM, Rangel-Moreno J, Randall TD. Ectopic lymphoid tissues and
local immunity. Semin Immunol 2008;20:26e42.
[697] Moutsopoulos HM. Sjogren's syndrome: a forty-year scientific journey. J
Autoimmun 2014;51:1e9.
[698] Christodoulou MI, Kapsogeorgou EK, Moutsopoulos HM. Characteristics of
the minor salivary gland infiltrates in Sjogren's syndrome. J Autoimmun
2010;34:400e7.
[699] Kapsogeorgou EK, Christodoulou MI, Panagiotakos DB, Paikos S, Tassidou A,
Tzioufas AG, et al. Minor salivary gland inflammatory lesions in Sjogren
syndrome: do they evolve? J Rheumatol 2013;40:1566e71.
[700] Bombardieri M, Barone F, Humby F, Kelly S, McGurk M, Morgan P, et al.
Activation-induced cytidine deaminase expression in follicular dendritic cell
networks and interfollicular large B cells supports functionality of ectopic
lymphoid neogenesis in autoimmune sialoadenitis and MALT lymphoma in
Sjogren's syndrome. J Immunol 2007;179:4929e38.
[701] Theander E, Vasaitis L, Baecklund E, Nordmark G, Warfvinge G, Liedholm R,
et al. Lymphoid organisation in labial salivary gland biopsies is a possible
predictor for the development of malignant lymphoma in primary Sjogren's
syndrome. Ann Rheum Dis 2011;70:1363e8.
[702] Boehm N, Riechardt AI, Wiegand M, Pfeiffer N, Grus FH. Proinflammatory
cytokine profiling of tears from dry eye patients by means of antibody
microarrays. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:7725e30.
[703] Kang EH, Lee YJ, Hyon JY, Yun PY, Song YW. Salivary cytokine profiles in
primary Sjogren's syndrome differ from those in non-Sjogren sicca in terms
of TNF-alpha levels and Th-1/Th-2 ratios. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2011;29:
970e6.
[704] Lin X, Rui K, Deng J, Tian J, Wang X, Wang S, et al. Th17 cells play a critical
role in the development of experimental Sjogren's syndrome. Ann Rheum
Dis 2015;74:1302e10.
[705] Oh JY, Kim MK, Choi HJ, Ko JH, Kang EJ, Lee HJ, et al. Investigating the
relationship between serum interleukin-17 levels and systemic immune￾mediated disease in patients with dry eye syndrome. Korean J Ophthalmol
2011;25:73e6.
[706] Katsifis GE, Rekka S, Moutsopoulos NM, Pillemer S, Wahl SM. Systemic and
local interleukin-17 and linked cytokines associated with Sjogren's syn￾drome immunopathogenesis. Am J Pathol 2009;175:1167e77.
[707] Nguyen CQ, Hu MH, Li Y, Stewart C, Peck AB. Salivary gland tissue expression
of interleukin-23 and interleukin-17 in Sjogren's syndrome: findings in
humans and mice. Arthritis Rheum 2008;58:734e43.
[708] Nguyen CQ, Yin H, Lee BH, Carcamo WC, Chiorini JA, Peck AB. Pathogenic
effect of interleukin-17A in induction of Sjogren's syndrome-like disease
using adenovirus-mediated gene transfer. Arthritis Res Ther 2010;12. R220.
[709] Triantafyllopoulou A, Moutsopoulos HM. Autoimmunity and coxsackievirus
infection in primary Sjogren's syndrome. Ann N. Y Acad Sci 2005;1050:
389e96.
[710] Kapsogeorgou EK, Abu-Helu RF, Moutsopoulos HM, Manoussakis MN. Sali￾vary gland epithelial cell exosomes: A source of autoantigenic ribonucleo￾proteins. Arthritis Rheum 2005;52:1517e21.
[711] Casciola-Rosen L, Andrade F, Ulanet D, Wong WB, Rosen A. Cleavage by
granzyme B is strongly predictive of autoantigen status: implications for
initiation of autoimmunity. J Exp Med 1999;190:815e26.
[712] Mitsias DI, Kapsogeorgou EK, Moutsopoulos HM. The role of epithelial cells
in the initiation and perpetuation of autoimmune lesions: lessons from
Sjogren's syndrome (autoimmune epithelitis). Lupus 2006;15:255e61.
[713] Cornec D, Devauchelle-Pensec V, Tobon GJ, Pers JO, Jousse-Joulin S, Saraux A.
B cells in Sjogren's syndrome: from pathophysiology to diagnosis and
treatment. J Autoimmun 2012;39:161e7.
[714] Ishimaru N, Arakaki R, Watanabe M, Kobayashi M, Miyazaki K, Hayashi Y.
Development of autoimmune exocrinopathy resembling Sjogren's syndrome
in estrogen-deficient mice of healthy background. Am J Pathol 2003;163:
1481e90.
[715] Baudouin C, Brignole F, Pisella PJ, De Jean MS, Goguel A. Flow cytometric
analysis of the inflammatory marker HLA DR in dry eye syndrome: results
from 12 months of randomized treatment with topical cyclosporin A. Adv
Exp Med Biol 2002;506:761e9.
[716] Brignole F, Pisella PJ, De Saint Jean M, Goldschild M, Goguel A, Baudouin C.
Flow cytometric analysis of inflammatory markers in KCS: 6-month treat￾ment with topical cyclosporin A. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:90e5.
[717] Tsubota K, Fukagawa KT, Shimmura S, Saito I, Saito K, et al. Regulation of
human leukocyte antigen expression in human conjunctival epithelium.
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1999;40:28e34.
[718] Youinou P, Pers JO. Primary Sjogren's syndrome at a glance today. Jt Bone
Spine 2015;82:75e6.
[719] Gordon TP, Bolstad AI, Rischmueller M, Jonsson R, Waterman SA. Autoanti￾bodies in primary Sjogren's syndrome: new insights into mechanisms of €
autoantibody diversification and disease pathogenesis. Autoimmunity
2001;34:123e32.
[720] Dawson L, Tobin A, Smith P, Gordon T. Antimuscarinic antibodies in Sjogren's
syndrome: where are we, and where are we going? Arthritis Rheum
2005;52:2984e95.
[721] Bacman SR, Berra A, Sterin-Borda L, Borda ES. Human primary Sjogren's €
syndrome autoantibodies as mediators of nitric oxide release coupled to
lacrimal gland muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. Curr Eye Res 1998;17:
1135e42.
[722] Bacman S, Perez Leiros C, Sterin-Borda L, Hubscher O, Arana R, Borda E.
Autoantibodies against lacrimal gland M3 muscarinic acetylcholine re￾ceptors in patients with primary Sjogren's syndrome. Investig Ophthalmol €
Vis Sci 1998;39:151e6.
[723] Nguyen KH, Brayer J, Cha S, Diggs S, Yasunari U, Hilal G, et al. Evidence for
antimuscarinic acetylcholine receptor antibody-mediated secretory
dysfunction in NOD mice. Arthritis Rheum 2000;43:2297e306.
[724] Cavill D, Waterman SA, Gordon TP. Antibodies raised against the second
extracellular loop of the human muscarinic M3 receptor mimic functional
autoantibodies in Sjogren's syndrome. Scand J Immunol 2004;59:261 € e6.
[725] Sullivan DA. Possible mechanisms involved in the reduced tear secretion in
Sjogren's syndrome. In: Homma M, Sugai S, Tojo T, Miyasaka N, Akizuki M, €
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 501
editors. Sjogren's Syndrome State of the Art. Amsterdam: Kugler Press; 1994. €
p. 3e19.
[726] Xu KP, Katagiri S, Takeuchi T, Tsubota K. Biopsy of labial salivary glands and
lacrimal glands in the diagnosis of Sjogren's syndrome. J Rheumatol
1996;23:76e82.
[727] Alpert S, Kang HI, Weissman I, Fox RI. Expression of granzyme A in salivary
gland biopsies from patients with primary Sjogren's syndrome. Arthritis
Rheum 1994;37:1046e54.
[728] Tsubota K, Saito I, Miyasaka N. Granzyme A and perforin expressed in the
lacrimal glands of patients with Sjogren's syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol
1994;117:120e1.
[729] Tsubota K, Xu KP, Fujihara T, Katagiri S, Takeuchi T. Decreased reflex tearing
is associated with lymphocytic infiltration in lacrimal glands. J Rheumatol
1996;23:313e20.
[730] Knop E, Knop N. [Eye-associated lymphoid tissue (EALT) is continuously
spread throughout the ocular surface from the lacrimal gland to the lacrimal
drainage system]. Ophthalmologe 2003;100:929e42.
[731] Gao J, Schwalb TA, Addeo JV, Ghosn CR, Stern ME. The role of apoptosis in the
pathogenesis of canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca: the effect of topical
Cyclosporin A therapy. Cornea 1998;17:654e63.
[732] Croft M, Dubey C. Accessory molecule and costimulation requirements for
CD4 T cell response. Crit Rev Immunol 1997;17:89e118.
[733] Villani E, Beretta S, De Capitani M, Galimberti D, Viola F, Ratiglia R. In vivo
confocal microscopy of meibomian glands in Sjogren's syndrome. Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:933e9.
[734] Solomon A, Dursun D, Liu Z, Xie Y, Macri A, Pflugfelder SC. Pro- and anti￾inflammatory forms of interleukin-1 in the tear fluid and conjunctiva of
patients with dry-eye disease. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:
2283e92.
[735] Caffery BE, Joyce E, Heynen ML, Ritter 3rd R, Jones LA, Senchyna M. Quan￾tification of conjunctival TNF-alpha in aqueous-deficient dry eye. Optom Vis
Sci 2014;91:156e62.
[736] Takahashi H, Asano K, Nakamura S, Ishida-Yamamoto A, Iizuka H. Interferon￾gamma-dependent stimulation of human involucrin gene expression: STAT1
(signal transduction and activators of transcription 1) protein activates
involucrin promoter activity. Biochem J 1999;344(Pt 3):797e802.
[737] Li S, Nikulina K, DeVoss J, Wu AJ, Strauss EC, Anderson MS, et al. Small
proline-rich protein 1B (SPRR1B) is a biomarker for squamous metaplasia in
dry eye disease. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:34e41.
[738] Kawasaki S, Kawamoto S, Yokoi N, Connon C, Minesaki Y, Kinoshita S, et al.
Up-regulated gene expression in the conjunctival epithelium of patients
with Sjogren's syndrome. Exp Eye Res 2003;77:17e26.
[739] Hirai N, Kawasaki S, Tanioka H, Connon CJ, Yamasaki K, Yokoi N, et al.
Pathological keratinisation in the conjunctival epithelium of Sjogren's syn￾drome. Exp Eye Res 2006;82:371e8.
[740] Tong L, Corrales RM, Chen Z, Villarreal AL, De Paiva CS, Beuerman R, et al.
Expression and regulation of cornified envelope proteins in human corneal
epithelium. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:1938e46.
[741] Vijmasi T, et al. Topical administration of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist
as a therapy for aqueous-deficient dry eye in autoimmune disease. Mol Vis
2013;19:1957e65.
[742] The definition and classification of dry eye disease: report of the Definition
and Classification Subcommittee of the International Dry Eye WorkShop.
Ocul Surf 2007;2007(5):75e92.
[743] Scherz W, Dohlman CH. Is the lacrimal gland dispensable? Keratoconjunc￾tivitis sicca after lacrimal gland removal. Arch Ophthalmol 1975;93:281e3.
[744] Hegab SM, Sheriff SM, el-Aasar ES, Lashin EA, Phillips CI. Congenital alacrima
without associated manifestations (AD). An affected father and son.
Ophthalmic Paediatr Genet 1991;12:161e3.
[745] Kim SH, Hwang S, Kweon S, Kim TK, Oh J. Two cases of lacrimal gland
agenesis in the same familyeclinicoradiologic findings and management.
Can J Ophthalmol 2005;40:502e5.
[746] Athappilly GK, Braverman RS. Congenital alacrima in a patient with ble￾pharophimosis syndrome. Ophthalmic Genet 2009;30:37e9.
[747] Arya SK, Chaudhuri Z, Jain R, Nahar R, Sood S. Congenital alacrima in Pierre
Robin sequence. Cornea 2004;23:632e4.
[748] Brooks BP, Kleta R, Stuart C, Tuchman M, Jeong A, Stergiopoulos SG, et al.
Genotypic heterogeneity and clinical phenotype in triple A syndrome: a
review of the NIH experience 2000-2005. Clin Genet 2005;68:215e21.
[749] Sarathi V, Shah NS. Triple-A syndrome. Adv Exp Med Biol 2010;685:1e8.
[750] Krumbholz M, Koehler K, Huebner A. Cellular localization of 17 natural
mutant variants of ALADIN protein in triple A syndrome - shedding light on
an unexpected splice mutation. Biochem Cell Biol 2006;84:243e9.
[751] Rocha EM, Alves M, Rios JD, Dartt DA. The Aging Lacrimal Gland: Changes in
Structure and Function. Ocul Surf 2008;6:162e74.
[752] Na KS, Mok JW, Kim JY, Joo CK. Proinflammatory gene polymorphisms are
potentially associated with Korean non-Sjogren dry eye patients. Mol Vis
2011;17:2818e23.
[753] Ren G, Shao T, Zhuang Y, Hu H, Zhang X, Huang J, et al. Association of killer
cell immunoglobulin-like receptor and human leukocyte antigen-C genotype
with dry eye disease in a Chinese Han population. Genet Test Mol Biomark
2012;16:910e4.
[754] Van Haeringen NJ. Aging and the lacrimal system. Br J Ophthalmol 1997;81:
824e6.
[755] McGill JI, Liakos GM, Goulding N, Seal DV. Normal tear protein profiles and
age-related changes. Br J Ophthalmol 1984;68:316e20.
[756] Seal DV. The effect of ageing and disease on tear constituents. Trans Oph￾thalmol Soc U. K 1985;104(Pt 4):355e62.
[757] Hamano T, Mitsunaga S, Kotani S, Hamano T, Hamano K, Hamano H, et al.
Tear volume in relation to contact lens wear and age. CLAO J 1990;16:57e61.
[758] Boberg-Ans J. On the corneal sensitivity. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1956;34:
149e62.
[759] Millodot M. The influence of age onthe sensitivity of the cornea. Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1977;16:240e2.
[760] Acosta MC, Alfaro ML, Borras F, Belmonte C, Gallar J. Influence of age, gender
and iris color on mechanical and chemical sensitivity of the cornea and
conjunctiva. Exp Eye Res 2006;83:932e8.
[761] Pietsch RL, Pearlman ME. Human tear lysozyme variables. Arch Ophthalmol
1973;90:94e6.
[762] Bonavida B, Sapse AT. Human tear lysozyme. II. Quantitative determination
with standard Schirmer strips. Am J Ophthalmol 1968;66:70e6.
[763] Mathers WD, Lane JA, Zimmerman MB. Tear film changes associated with
normal aging. Cornea 1996;15:229e34.
[764] Nasu M, Matsubara O, Yamamoto H. Post-mortem prevalence of lymphocytic
infiltration of the lacrymal gland: a comparative study in autoimmune and
non-autoimmune diseases. J Pathol 1984;143:11e5.
[765] Damato BE, Allan D, Murray SB, Lee WR. Senile atrophy of the human
lacrimal gland: the contribution of chronic inflammatory disease. Br J Oph￾thalmol 1984;68:674e80.
[766] Obata H, Yamamoto S, Horiuchi H, Machinami R. Histopathologic study of
human lacrimal gland. Statistical analysis with special reference to aging.
Ophthalmology 1995;102:678e86.
[767] Kojima T, Wakamatsu TH, Dogru M, Ogawa Y, Igarashi A, Ibrahim OM, et al.
Age-related dysfunction of the lacrimal gland and oxidative stress: evidence
from the Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase-1 (Sod1) knockout mice. Am J Pathol
2012;180:1879e96.
[768] Zoukhri D, Kublin CL. Impaired neurotransmitter release from lacrimal and
salivary gland nerves of a murine model of Sjogren's syndrome. Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:925e32.
[769] Zoukhri D, Macari E, Kublin CL. A single injection of interleukin-1 induces
reversible aqueous-tear deficiency, lacrimal gland inflammation, and acinar
and ductal cell proliferation. Exp Eye Res 2007;84:894e904.
[770] Uchino Y, Kawakita T, Miyazawa M, Ishii T, Onouchi H, Yasuda K, et al.
Oxidative stress induced inflammation initiates functional decline of tear
production. PLoS One 2012;7. e45805.
[771] Halliwell B, Gutteridge JM. Oxygen toxicity, oxygen radicals, transition
metals and disease. Biochem J 1984;219:1e14.
[772] Wakamatsu TH, Dogru M, Tsubota K. Tearful relations: oxidative stress,
inflammation and eye diseases. Arq Bras Oftalmol 2008;71:72e9.
[773] Augustin AJ, Spitznas M, Kaviani N, Meller D, Koch FH, Grus F, et al. Oxidative
reactions in the tear fluid of patients suffering from dry eyes. Graefes Arch
Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1995;233:694e8.
[774] Giebel J, Woenckhaus C, Fabian M, Tost F. Age-related differential expression
of apoptosis-related genes in conjunctival epithelial cells. Acta Ophthalmol
Scand 2005;83:471e6.
[775] Zhu W, Hong J, Zheng T, Le Q, Xu J, Sun X. Age-related changes of human
conjunctiva on in vivo confocal microscopy. Br J Ophthalmol 2010;94:
1448e53.
[776] Labbe A, Dupas B, Hamard P, Baudouin C. In vivo confocal microscopy study
of blebs after filtering surgery. Ophthalmology 2005;112:1979.
[777] Abdel-Khalek LM, Williamson J, Lee WR. Morphological changes in the hu￾man conjunctival epithelium. II. In keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Br J Oph￾thalmol 1978;62:800e6.
[778] Massingale ML, Li X, Vallabhajosyula M, Chen D, Wei Y, Asbell PA. Analysis of
inflammatory cytokines in the tears of dry eye patients. Cornea 2009;28:
1023e7.
[779] Bresnitz EA, Strom BL. Epidemiology of sarcoidosis. Epidemiol Rev 1983;5:
124e56.
[780] Baughman RP, Lower EE, du Bois RM. Sarcoidosis Lancet 2003;361:1111e8.
[781] Jones NP. Sarcoidosis. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2002;13:393e6.
[782] Pasadhika S, Rosenbaum JT. Ocular Sarcoidosis. Clin Chest Med 2015;36:
669e83.
[783] Jones BR, Stevenson CJ. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca due to sarcoidosis. Br J
Ophthalmol 1957;41:153e60.
[784] Drosos AA, Constantopoulos SH, Psychos D, Stefanou D, Papadimitriou CS,
Moutsopoulos HM. The forgotten cause of sicca complex; sarcoidosis. J
Rheumatol 1989;16:1548e51.
[785] Drosos AA, Voulgari PV, Psychos DN, Tsifetaki N, Bai M. Sicca syndrome in
patients with sarcoidosis. Rheumatol Int 1999;18:177e80.
[786] Agostini C, Meneghin A, Semenzato G. T-lymphocytes and cytokines in
sarcoidosis. Curr Opin Pulm Med 2002;8:435e40.
[787] Barnard J, Newman LS. Sarcoidosis: immunology, rheumatic involvement,
and therapeutics. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2001;13:84e91.
[788] Heath P. Ocular lymphomas. Am J Ophthalmol 1949;32:1213e23.
[789] Cacoub P, Renou C, Rosenthal E, Cohen P, Loury I, Loustaud-Ratti V, et al.
Extrahepatic manifestations associated with hepatitis C virus infection. A
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 502
prospective multicenter study of 321 patients. The GERMIVIC. Groupe
d'Etude et de Recherche en Medecine Interne et Maladies Infectieuses sur le
Virus de l'Hepatite C. Med Baltim 2000;79:47e56.
[790] Ramos-Casals M, Munoz S, Zeron PB. Hepatitis C virus and Sjogren's syn￾drome: trigger or mimic? Rheum Dis Clin North Am 2008;34:869e84. vii.
[791] Ramos-Casals M, Munoz S, Medina F, Jara LJ, Rosas J, Calvo-Alen J, et al.
Systemic autoimmune diseases in patients with hepatitis C virus infection:
characterization of 1020 cases (The HISPAMEC Registry). J Rheumatol
2009;36:1442e8.
[792] DeCarlo DK, Penner SL, Schamerloh RJ, Fullard RJ. Dry eye among males
infected with the human immunodeficiency virus. J Am Optom Assoc
1995;66:533e8.
[793] Chronister CL. Review of external ocular disease associated with aids and
HIV infection. Optom Vis Sci 1996;73:225e30.
[794] Itescu S, Brancato LJ, Buxbaum J, Gregersen PK, Rizk CC, Croxson TS, et al.
A diffuse infiltrative CD8 lymphocytosis syndrome in human immunodefi-
ciency virus (HIV) infection: a host immune response associated with HLA￾DR5. Ann Intern Med 1990;112:3e10.
[795] Durkin SR, Roos D, Higgs B, Casson RJ, Selva D. Ophthalmic and adnexal
complications of radiotherapy. Acta Ophthalmol Scand 2007;85:240e50.
[796] Bhandare N, Moiseenko V, Song WY, Morris CG, Bhatti MT, Mendenhall WM.
Severe dry eye syndrome after radiotherapy for head-and-neck tumors. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2012;82:1501e8.
[797] Bessell EM, Henk JM, Whitelocke RA, Wright JE. Ocular morbidity after
radiotherapy of orbital and conjunctival lymphoma. Eye (Lond) 1987;1(Pt 1):
90e6.
[798] Stafford SL, Kozelsky TF, Garrity JA, Kurtin PJ, Leavitt JA, Martenson JA, et al.
Orbital lymphoma: radiotherapy outcome and complications. Radiother
Oncol 2001;59:139e44.
[799] Gamus D, Weschler Z, Greenberg S, Romano A. Decreased tear secretion in
Chernobyl children: external eye disorders in children subjected to long￾term low-dose radiation. Adv Exp Med Biol 1994;350:513e6.
[800] Gazda MJ, Schultheiss TE, Stephens LC, Ang KK, Peters LJ. The relationship
between apoptosis and atrophy in the irradiated lacrimal gland. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1992;24:693e7.
[801] Hakim SG, Schroder C, Geerling G, Lauer I, Wedel T, Kosmehl H, et al. Early
and late immunohistochemical and ultrastructural changes associated with
functional impairment of the lachrymal gland following external beam ra￾diation. Int J Exp Pathol 2006;87:65e71.
[802] Stephens L, Schultheiss TE, Peters LJ, Ang K, Gray KN. Acute radiation injury
of ocular adnexa. Arch Ophthalmol 1988;106:389e91.
[803] Stephens LC, Schultheiss TE, Price RE, Ang KK, Peters LJ. Radiation apoptosis
of serous acinar cells of salivary and lacrimal glands. Cancer 1991;67:
1539e43.
[804] Radford CF, Rauz S, Williams GP, Saw VP, Dart JK. Incidence, presenting
features, and diagnosis of cicatrising conjunctivitis in the United Kingdom.
Eye (Lond) 2012;26:1199e208.
[805] Saboo US, Amparo F, Abud TB, Schaumberg DA, Dana R. Vision-Related
Quality of Life in Patients with Ocular Graft-versus-Host Disease. Ophthal￾mology 2015;122:1669e74.
[806] Shikari H, Antin JH, Dana R. Ocular graft-versus-host disease: a review. Surv
Ophthalmol 2013;58:233e51.
[807] Nassar A, Tabbara KF, Aljurf M. Ocular manifestations of graft-versus-host
disease. Saudi J Ophthalmol 2013;27:215e22.
[808] Kim SK. Ocular graft vs. host disease. Ocul Surf 2005;3:S177e9.
[809] Mencucci R, Rossi Ferrini C, Bosi A, Volpe R, Guidi S, Salvi G. Ophthalmo￾logical aspects in allogenic bone marrow transplantation: Sjogren-like syn￾drome in graft-versus-host disease. Eur J Ophthalmol 1997;7:13e8.
[810] Jack MK, Hicks JD. Ocular complications in high-dose chemoradiotherapy
and marrow transplantation. Ann Ophthalmol 1981;13:709e11.
[811] Vanathi M, Kashyap S, Khan R, Seth T, Mishra P, Mahapatra M, et al. Ocular
surface evaluation in allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation pa￾tients. Eur J Ophthalmol 2014;24:655e66.
[812] Alves M, Reinach PS, Paula JS, Vellasco e Cruz AA, Bachette L, Faustino J, et al.
Comparison of diagnostic tests in distinct well-defined conditions related to
dry eye disease. PLoS One 2014;9. e97921.
[813] Espana EM, Shah S, Santhiago MR, Singh AD. Graft versus host disease:
clinical evaluation, diagnosis and management. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Oph￾thalmol 2013;251:1257e66.
[814] Ogawa Y, Okamoto S, Wakui M, Watanabe R, Yamada M, Yoshino M, et al.
Dry eye after haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Br J Ophthalmol
1999;83:1125e30.
[815] Ogawa Y, Morikawa S, Okano H, Mabuchi Y, Suzuki S, Yaguchi T, et al. MHC￾compatible bone marrow stromal/stem cells trigger fibrosis by activating
host T cells in a scleroderma mouse model. eLife 2016;4. e09394.
[816] Uchino M, Ogawa Y, Uchino Y, Mori T, Okamoto S, Tsubota K. Comparison of
stem cell sources in the severity of dry eye after allogeneic haematopoietic
stem cell transplantation. Br J Ophthalmol 2012;96:34e7.
[817] Kamoi M, Ogawa Y, Uchino M, Tatematsu Y, Mori T, Okamoto S, et al. Donor￾recipient gender difference affects severity of dry eye after hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation. Eye (Lond) 2011;25:860e5.
[818] Jacobs R, Tran U, Chen H, Kassim A, Engelhardt BG, Greer JP, et al. Prevalence
and risk factors associated with development of ocular GVHD defined by NIH
consensus criteria. Bone Marrow Transpl 2012;47:1470e3.
[819] Na KS, Yoo YS, Mok JW, Lee JW, Joo CK. Incidence and risk factors for ocular
GVHD after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bone
Marrow Transpl 2015;50:1459e64.
[820] Yaguchi S, Ogawa Y, Kawakita T, Shimmura S, Tsubota K. Tissue Renin￾Angiotensin System in Lacrimal Gland Fibrosis in a Murine Model of Chronic
Graft-Versus-Host Disease. Cornea 2015;34(Suppl 11):S142e52.
[821] Ogawa Y, Shimmura S, Kawakita T, Yoshida S, Kawakami Y, Tsubota K.
Epithelial mesenchymal transition in human ocular chronic graft-versus￾host disease. Am J Pathol 2009;175:2372e81.
[822] Ogawa Y, Kodama H, Kameyama K, Yamazaki K, Yasuoka H, Okamoto S, et al.
Donor fibroblast chimerism in the pathogenic fibrotic lesion of human
chronic graft-versus-host disease. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:
4519e27.
[823] Ogawa Y, Yamazaki K, Kuwana M, Mashima Y, Nakamura Y, Ishida S, et al.
A significant role of stromal fibroblasts in rapidly progressive dry eye in
patients with chronic GVHD. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:111e9.
[824] Jabs DA, Hirst LW, Green WR, Tutschka PJ, Santos GW, Beschorner WE. The
eye in bone marrow transplantation. II. Histopathology. Arch Ophthalmol
1983;101:585e90.
[825] Ban Y, Ogawa Y, Ibrahim OM, Tatematsu Y, Kamoi M, Uchino M, et al.
Morphologic evaluation of meibomian glands in chronic graft-versus-host
disease using in vivo laser confocal microscopy. Mol Vis 2011;17:2533e43.
[826] Tatematsu Y, Ogawa Y, Shimmura S, Dogru M, Yaguchi S, Nagai T, et al.
Mucosal microvilli in dry eye patients with chronic GVHD. Bone Marrow
Transpl 2012;47:416e25.
[827] Li P, Sun Y, Hariri S, Zhou Z, Inamoto Y, Lee SJ, et al. Anterior segment optical
coherence tomography evaluation of ocular graft-versus-host disease: a case
study. Quant Imaging Med Surg 2015;5:163e70.
[828] Ogawa Y, Kuwana MK, Mashima Y, Yamada M, Mori T, et al. Periductal area
as the primary site for T-cell activation in lacrimal gland chronic graft￾versus-host disease. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:1888e96.
[829] Yaguchi S, Ogawa Y, Shimmura S, Kawakita T, Hatou S, Satofuka S, et al.
Angiotensin II type 1 receptor antagonist attenuates lacrimal gland, lung,
and liver fibrosis in a murine model of chronic graft-versus-host disease.
PLoS One 2013;8. e64724.
[830] Engel LA, Wittig S, Bock F, Sauerbier L, Scheid C, Holtick U, et al. Meibography
and meibomian gland measurements in ocular graft-versus-host disease.
Bone Marrow Transpl 2015;50 :961e7.
[831] Rojas B, Cuhna R, Zafirakis P, Ramirez JM, Lizan-garciia M, Zhao T, et al. Cell
populations and adhesion molecules expression in conjunctiva before and
after bone marrow transplantation. Exp Eye Res 2005;81:313e25.
[832] Robinson MR, Lee SS, Rubin BI, Wayne AS, Pavletic SZ, Bishop MR, et al.
Topical corticosteroid therapy for cicatricial conjunctivitis associated with
chronic graft-versus-host disease. Bone Marrow Transpl 2004;33:1031e5.
[833] Westekemper H, Meller S, Citak S, Schulte C, Steuhl KP, Homey B, et al.
Differential chemokine expression in chronic GVHD of the conjunctiva. Bone
Marrow Transpl 2010;45:1340e6.
[834] Suzuki M, Usui T, Kinoshita N, Yamagami S, Amano S. A case of sterile corneal
perforation after bone marrow transplantation. Eye (Lond) 2007;21:114e6.
[835] Inagaki E, Ogawa Y, Matsumoto Y, Kawakita T, Shimmura S, Tsubota K. Four
cases of corneal perforation in patients with chronic graft-versus-host dis￾ease. Mol Vis 2011;17:598e606.
[836] Ban Y, Ogawa Y, Goto E, Uchino M, Terauchi N, Seki M, et al. Tear function
and lipid layer alterations in dry eye patients with chronic graft-vs-host
disease. Eye (Lond) 2009;23:202e8.
[837] Berchicci L, Iuliano L, Miserocchi E, Bandello F, Modorati G. Tear osmolarity
in ocular graft-versus-host disease. Cornea 2014;33:1252e6.
[838] Riemens A, Stoyanova E, Rothova A, Kuiper J. Cytokines in tear fluid of pa￾tients with ocular graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic stem cell
transplantation. Mol Vis 2012;18:797e802.
[839] Jung JW, Han SJ, Song MK, Kim TI, Kim EK, Min YH, et al. Tear Cytokines as
Biomarkers for Chronic Graft-versus-Host Disease. Biol Blood Marrow
Transpl 2015;21:2079e85.
[840] Sakimoto T, Ohnishi T, Ishimori A. Significance of ectodomain shedding of
TNF receptor 1 in ocular surface. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:
2419e23.
[841] Hassan AS, Clouthier SG, Ferrara JL, Stepan A, Mian SI, Ahmad AZ, et al.
Lacrimal gland involvement in graft-versus-host disease: a murine model.
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:2692e7.
[842] Cocho L, Fernandez I, Calonge M, Martinez V, Gonzalez-Garcia MJ,
Caballero D, et al. Gene Expression-Based Predictive Models of Graft Versus
Host Disease-Associated Dry Eye. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:
4570e81.
[843] Sotozono C, Ueta M, Nakatani E, Kitami A, Watanabe H, Sueki H, et al. Pre￾dictive Factors Associated With Acute Ocular Involvement in Stevens-John￾son Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis. Am J Ophthalmol 2015;160:
228e37.
[844] Saeed H, Mantagos IS, Chodosh J. Complications of Stevens-Johnson syn￾drome beyond the eye and skin. Burns 2016;42:20e7.
[845] Roujeau JC. The spectrum of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis: a clinical classification. J Investig Dermatol 1994;102:28Se30S.
[846] Kohanim S, Palioura S, Saeed HN, Akpek EK, Amescua G, Basu S, et al.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 503
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal NecrolysiseA Comprehensive
Review and Guide to Therapy. I. Systemic Disease. Ocul Surf 2016;14:2e19.
[847] Hutchinson JK, Gurwood AS. Iatrogenically induced Stevens-Johnson syn￾drome after a car accident. Optometry 2011;82:9e14.
[848] Jensen S. A case of Stevens-Johnson's syndrome following antiepileptic
medication. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1967;45:576e81.
[849] Chhipa SA, Masood S, Salarzai Y, Khan QA, Ahmad K, Sajid S. Ocular mani￾festation, complications and aetiological factors in Stevens-Johnson syn￾drome/toxic epidermal necrolysis. J Pak Med Assoc 2015;65:62e4.
[850] Ueta M, Sawai H, Sotozono C, Hitomi Y, Kaniwa N, Kim MK, et al. IKZF1, a
new susceptibility gene for cold medicine-related Stevens-Johnson syn￾drome/toxic epidermal necrolysis with severe mucosal involvement. J Al￾lergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:1538e45. e1517.
[851] Goldberg D, Panigrahi D, Barazi M, Abelson M, Butrus S. A case of rofecoxib￾associated stevens-johnson syndrome with corneal and conjunctival
changes. Cornea 2004;23:736e7.
[852] Lau B, Mutyala D, Dhaliwal D. A case report of doxycycline-induced Stevens￾Johnson syndrome. Cornea 2011;30:595e7.
[853] Kumar RS, Tan DT, Yong-Ming P, Francis OT, Sek-Tien H, Anand P, et al.
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Acetazolamide. J Glaucoma 2011 [Epub
ahead of print].
[854] Schulze Schwering M, Kayange P, van Oosterhout JJ, Spitzer MS. Severe eye
complications from Stevens-Johnson syndrome in a human immunodefi-
ciency virus-infected patient in Malawi. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2013;89:162e4.
[855] Saka B, Barro-Traore F, Atadokpede FA, Kobangue L, Niamba PA, Adegbidi H,
et al. Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis in sub￾Saharan Africa: a multicentric study in four countries. Int J Dermatol
2013;52:575e9.
[856] Chung WH, Hung SI, Hong HS, Hsih MS, Yang LC, Ho HC, et al. Medical ge￾netics: a marker for Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Nature 2004;428:486.
[857] Ueta M, Tokunaga K, Sotozono C, Sawai H, Tamiya G, Inatomi T, et al. HLA￾A*0206 with TLR3 polymorphisms exerts more than additive effects in
Stevens-Johnson syndrome with severe ocular surface complications. PLoS
One 2012;7. e43650.
[858] Sotozono C, Inagaki K, Fujita A, Koizumi N, Sano Y, Inatomi T, et al. Methi￾cillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and methicillin-resistant Staphylo￾coccus epidermidis infections in the cornea. Cornea 2002;21:S94e101.
[859] Ueta M, Tamiya G, Tokunaga K, Sotozono C, Ueki M, Sawai H, et al. Epistatic
interaction between Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) and prostaglandin E receptor
3 (PTGER3) genes. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;129:1413 e11e6 e11.
[860] Correia O, Delgado L, Ramos JP, Resende C, Torrinha JA. Cutaneous T-cell
recruitment in toxic epidermal necrolysis. Further evidence of CD8þ
lymphocyte involvement. Arch Dermatol 1993;129:466e8.
[861] Harris V, Jackson C, Cooper A. Review of Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis. Int J Mol
Sci 2016;17:2135.
[862] Bolitho P, Voskoboinik I, Trapani JA, Smyth MJ. Apoptosis induced by the
lymphocyte effector molecule perforin. Curr Opin Immunol 2007;19:
339e47.
[863] Tsubota K, Satake Y, Kaido M, Shinozaki N, Shimmura S, Bissen-Miyajima H,
et al. Treatment of severe ocular-surface disorders with corneal epithelial
stem-cell transplantation. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1697e703.
[864] Kaido M, Dogru M, Yamada M, Sotozono C, Kinoshita S, Shimazaki J, et al.
Functional visual acuity in Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol
2006;142:917e22.
[865] Kang MH, Kim MK, Lee HJ, Lee HI, Wee WR, Lee JH. Interleukin-17 in various
ocular surface inflammatory diseases. J Korean Med Sci 2011;26:938e44.
[866] Ohashi Y, Ishida R, Kojima T, Goto E, Matsumoto Y, Watanabe K, et al.
Abnormal protein profiles in tears with dry eye syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol
2003;136:291e9.
[867] Lopez-Garcia JS, Rivas Jara L, Garcia-Lozano CI, Conesa E, de Juan IE, Murube
del Castillo J. Ocular features and histopathologic changes during follow-up
of toxic epidermal necrolysis. Ophthalmology 2011;118:265e71.
[868] Tanioka H, Kawasaki S, Sotozono C, Nakamura T, Inatomi T, Kinoshita S. The
relationship between preoperative clinical scores and immunohistological
evaluation of surgically resected tissues in chronic severe ocular surface
diseases. Jpn J Ophthalmol 2010;54:66e73.
[869] Nakamura T, Nishida K, Dota A, Matsuki M, Yamanishi K, Kinoshita S.
Elevated expression of transglutaminase 1 and keratinization-related pro￾teins in conjunctiva in severe ocular surface disease. Investig Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2001;42:549e56.
[870] Nishida K, Yamanishi K, Yamada K, Dota A, Kawasaki S, Quantock AJ, et al.
Epithelial hyperproliferation and transglutaminase 1 gene expression in
Stevens-Johnson syndrome conjunctiva. Am J Pathol 1999;154:331e6.
[871] Lund AS, Heegaard S, Prause JU, Toft PB, Skov L. Expression of filaggrin in
normal and keratinized conjunctiva. Open Ophthalmol J 2012;6:137e40.
[872] Woo SBGM. Ulcerative, vesicular, and bullous lesions. In: Greenberg
msgms JA, editor. Burket's Oral Medicine: Diagnosis and Treatment. Hamil￾ton: B.C. Decker Inc; 2008.
[873] Xu HH, Werth VP, Parisi E, Sollecito TP. Mucous membrane pemphigoid.
Dent Clin North Am 2013;57:611e30.
[874] Chan LS. Mucous membrane pemphigoid. Clin Dermatol 2001;19:703e11.
[875] Thorne JE, Anhalt GJ, Jabs DA. Mucous membrane pemphigoid and
pseudopemphigoid. Ophthalmology 2004;111:45e52.
[876] Bernard P, Vaillant L, Labeille B, Bedane C, Arbeille B, Denoeux JP, et al.
Incidence and distribution of subepidermal autoimmune bullous skin dis￾eases in three French regions. Bullous Diseases French Study Group. Arch
Dermatol 1995;131:48e52.
[877] Bertram F, Brocker EB, Zillikens D, Schmidt E. Prospective analysis of the
incidence of autoimmune bullous disorders in Lower Franconia, Germany. J
Dtsch Dermatol Ges 2009;7:434e40.
[878] Mondino BJ, Brown SI, Rabin BS. HLA antigens in ocular cicatricial pemphi￾goid. Br J Ophthalmol 1978;62:265e7.
[879] Ahmed AR, Foster S, Zaltas M, Notani G, Awdeh Z, Alper CA, et al. Association
of DQw7 (DQB1*0301) with ocular cicatricial pemphigoid. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U. S. A 1991;88:11579e82.
[880] Olsen KE, Holland EJ. The association between ocular cicatricial pemphigoid
and rheumatoid arthritis. Cornea 1998;17:504e7.
[881] Miserocchi E, Waheed NK, Baltatzis S, Foster CS. Chronic cicatrizing
conjunctivitis in a patient with ocular cicatricial pemphigoid and fatal
Wegener granulomatosis. Am J Ophthalmol 2001;132:923e4.
[882] Hatton MP, Raizman M, Foster CS. Exacerbation of undiagnosed ocular
cicatricial pemphigoid after repair of involutional entropion. Ophthal Plast
Reconstr Surg 2008;24:165e6.
[883] Lazarova Z, Yee C, Darling T, Briggaman RA, Yancey KB. Passive transfer of
anti-laminin 5 antibodies induces subepidermal blisters in neonatal mice. J
Clin Investig 1996;98:1509e18.
[884] Bernauer W, Wright P, Dart JK, Leonard JN, Lightman S. Cytokines in the
conjunctiva of acute and chronic mucous membrane pemphigoid: an
immunohistochemical analysis. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
1993;231:563e70.
[885] Mondino BJ, Rao H, Brown SI. T and B lymphocytes in ocular cicatricial
pemphigoid. Am J Ophthalmol 1981;92:536e42.
[886] Bodaghi B, Bertin V, Paques M, Toublanc M, Dezutter-Dambuyant C, Hoang￾Xuan T. Limbal conjunctival Langerhans cell density in ocular cicatricial
pemphigoid: an indirect immunofluorescence study on Dispase-split con￾junctiva. Curr Eye Res 1997;16:820e4.
[887] Lambiase A, Micera A, Mantelli F, Moretti C, Di Zazzo A, Perrella E, et al. T￾helper 17 lymphocytes in ocular cicatricial pemphigoid. Mol Vis 2009;15:
1449e55.
[888] Tesavibul N, Dorfman D, Sangwan VS, Christen W, Panayotis Z, Rojas B, et al.
Costimulatory molecules in ocular cicatricial pemphigoid. Investig Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 1998;39:982e8.
[890] Hoang-Xuan T, Foster CS, Raizman MB, Greenwood B. Mast cells in con￾junctiva affected by cicatricial pemphigoid. Ophthalmology 1989;96:
1110e4.
[891] Saito T, Nishida K, Sugiyama H, Yamato M, Maeda N, Okano T, et al. Abnormal
keratocytes and stromal inflammation in chronic phase of severe ocular
surface diseases with stem cell deficiency. Br J Ophthalmol 2008;92:404e10.
[892] Razzaque MS, Ahmed BS, Foster CS, Ahmed AR. Effects of IL-4 on conjunctival
fibroblasts: possible role in ocular cicatricial pemphigoid. Investig Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:3417e23.
[893] Razzaque MS, Foster CS, Ahmed AR. Role of enhanced expression of m-CSF in
conjunctiva affected by cicatricial pemphigoid. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2002;43:2977e83.
[894] Razzaque MS, Foster CS, Ahmed AR. Role of collagen-binding heat shock
protein 47 and transforming growth factor-beta1 in conjunctival scarring in
ocular cicatricial pemphigoid. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:1616e21.
[895] Razzaque MS, Foster CS, Ahmed AR. Role of connective tissue growth factor
in the pathogenesis of conjunctival scarring in ocular cicatricial pemphigoid.
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:1998e2003.
[896] Chan MF, Sack R, Quigley DA, Sathe S, Vijmasi T, Li S, et al. Membrane array
analysis of tear proteins in ocular cicatricial pemphigoid. Optom Vis Sci
2011;88:1005e9.
[897] Ahmed M, Zein G, Khawaja F, Foster CS. Ocular cicatricial pemphigoid:
pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment. Prog Retin Eye Res 2004;23:
579e92.
[898] Tyagi S, Bhol K, Natarajan K, Livir-Rallatos C, Foster CS, Ahmed AR. Ocular
cicatricial pemphigoid antigen: partial sequence and biochemical charac￾terization. Proc Natl Acad Sci U. S. A 1996;93:14714e9.
[899] Ahmed M, Zein G, Khawaja F, Foster CS. Ocular cicatricial pemphigoid:
pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment. Prog Retin Eye Res 2004;23:579e92.
[900] Merchant S, Weinstein M. Pemphigus vulgaris: the eyes have it. Pediatrics
2003;112:183e5.
[901] Amagai M. Autoimmunity against desmosomal cadherins in pemphigus. J
Dermatol Sci 1999;20:92e102.
[902] Scully C, Challacombe SJ. Pemphigus vulgaris: update on etiopathogenesis,
oral manifestations, and management. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 2002;13:
397e408.
[903] Hodak E, Kremer I, David M, Hazaz B, Rothem A, Feuerman P, et al.
Conjunctival involvement in pemphigus vulgaris: a clinical, histopatholog￾ical and immunofluorescence study. Br J Dermatol 1990;123:615e20.
[904] Guzey M, Ozardali I, Basar E, Aslan G, Satici A, Karadede S. A survey of
trachoma: the histopathology and the mechanism of progressive cicatri￾zation of eyelid tissues. Ophthalmologica 2000;214:277e84.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 504
[905] al-Rajhi AA, Hidayat A, Nasr A, al-Faran M. The histopathology and the
mechanism of entropion in patients with trachoma. Ophthalmology
1993;100:1293e6.
[906] Hu VH, Holland MJ, Cree IA, Pullin J, Weiss HA, Massae P, et al. In vivo
confocal microscopy and histopathology of the conjunctiva in trachomatous
scarring and normal tissue: a systematic comparison. Br J Ophthalmol
2013;97:1333e7.
[907] White ML, Chodosh J, Jang J, Dohlman C. Incidence of Stevens-Johnson
Syndrome and Chemical Burns to the Eye. Cornea 2015;34:1527e33.
[908] Roper-Hall MJ. A retrospective study of eye injuries. Ophthalmologica
1969;1e3:12e27.
[909] Wagoner MD. Chemical injuries of the eye: current concepts in pathophys￾iology and therapy. Surv Ophthalmol 1997;41:275e313.
[910] Dua HS, King AJ, Joseph A. A new classification of ocular surface burns. Br J
Ophthalmol 2001;85:1379e83.
[911] Bagley DM, Casterton PL, Dressler WE, Edelhauser HF, Kruszewski FH,
McCulley JP, et al. Proposed new classification scheme for chemical injury to
the human eye. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 2006;45:206e13.
[912] Gupta N, Kalaivani M, Tandon R. Comparison of prognostic value of Roper
Hall and Dua classification systems in acute ocular burns. Br J Ophthalmol
2011;95:194e8.
[913] Volkov VV, Brzheskii VV, Gladkikh AF. The diagnosis and treatment of the
dry eye syndrome of burn etiology. Oftalmol Zh 1990:328e30.
[914] Beuerman RW, Schimmelpfennig B. Sensory denervation of the rabbit cornea
affects epithelial properties. Exp Neurol 1980;69:196e201.
[915] Blanco-Mezquita T, Martinez-Garcia C, Proenca R, Zieske JD, Bonini S,
Lambiase A, et al. Nerve growth factor promotes corneal epithelial migration
by enhancing expression of matrix metalloprotease-9. Investig Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2013;54:3880e90.
[916] Shaheen BS, Bakir M, Jain S. Corneal nerves in health and disease. Surv
Ophthalmol 2014;59:263e85.
[917] Patel M, Fraunfelder FW. Toxicity of topical ophthalmic anesthetics. Expert
Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2013;9:983e8.
[918] Chao C, Golebiowski B, Stapleton F. The role of corneal innervation in LASIK￾induced neuropathic dry eye. Ocul Surf 2014;12:32e45.
[919] Benitez-del-Castillo JM, del Rio T, Iradier T, Hernandez JL, Castillo A, Garcia￾Sanchez J. Decrease in tear secretion and corneal sensitivity after laser in situ
keratomileusis. Cornea 2001;20:30e2.
[920] Battat L, Macri A, Dursun D, Pflugfelder SC. Effects of laser in situ kerato￾mileusis on tear production, clearance, and the ocular surface. Ophthal￾mology 2001;108:1230e5.
[921] Muller LJ, Marfurt CF, Kruse F, Tervo TM. Corneal nerves: structure, contents
and function. Exp Eye Res 2003;76:521e42.
[922] Nettune GR, Pflugfelder SC. Post-LASIK tear dysfunction and dysesthesia.
Ocul Surf 2010;8:135e45.
[923] De Paiva CS, Chen Z, Koch DD, Hamill MB, Manuel FK, Hassan SS, et al. The
incidence and risk factors for developing dry eye after myopic LASIK. Am J
Ophthalmol 2006;141:438e45.
[924] Raoof D, Pineda R. Dry eye after laser in-situ keratomileusis. Semin Oph￾thalmol 2014;29:358e62.
[925] Lee JB, Ryu CH, Kim J, Kim EK, Kim HB. Comparison of tear secretion and tear
film instability after photorefractive keratectomy and laser in situ kerato￾mileusis. J Cataract Refract Surg 2000;26:1326e31.
[926] Wilson SE. Laser in situ keratomileusis-induced (presumed) neurotrophic
epitheliopathy. Ophthalmology 2001;108:1082e7.
[927] Bonini S, Rama P, Olzi D, Lambiase A. Neurotrophic keratitis. Eye (Lond)
2003;17:989e95.
[928] Harding SP, Lipton JR, Wells JC. Natural history of herpes zoster oph￾thalmicus: predictors of postherpetic neuralgia and ocular involvement. Br J
Ophthalmol 1987;71:353e8.
[929] Ljubimov AV, Saghizadeh M. Progress in corneal wound healing. Prog Retin
Eye Res 2015;49:17e45.
[930] Chikama T, Fukuda K, Morishige N, Nishida T. Treatment of neurotrophic
keratopathy with substance-P-derived peptide (FGLM) and insulin-like
growth factor I. Lancet 1998;351:1783e4.
[931] Lambiase A, Rama P, Bonini S, Caprioglio G, Aloe L. Topical treatment with
nerve growth factor for corneal neurotrophic ulcers. N Engl J Med 1998;338:
1174e80.
[932] Bonini S, Lambiase A, Rama P, Caprioglio G, Aloe L. Topical treatment with
nerve growth factor for neurotrophic keratitis. Ophthalmology 2000;107:
1347e51. discussion 1351e1342.
[933] Nichols KK, Redfern RL, Jacob JT, Nelson JD, Fonn D, Forstot SL, et al. The TFOS
International Workshop on Contact Lens Discomfort: report of the definition
and classification subcommittee. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54.
TFOS14e19.
[934] Tamura M, Murata N, Hayashi M, Regis J. Injury of the lacrimal component of
the nervus intermedius function after radiosurgery versus microsurgery.
Neurochirurgie 2004;50:338e44.
[935] Ayberk G, Ozveren MF, Uzum N, Tosun O, Akcay EK. Cellular schwannoma of
the greater superficial petrosal nerve presenting with abducens nerve palsy
and xerophthalmia: case report. Neurosurgery 2008;63:E813e4. discussion
E4.
[936] Ichimura S, Yoshida K, Sutiono AB, Horiguchi T, Sasaki H, Kawase T. Greater
petrosal nerve schwannomas-analysis of four cases and review of the liter￾ature. Neurosurg Rev 2010;33:477e82.
[937] Wong J, Lan W, Ong LM, Tong L. Non-hormonal systemic medications and
dry eye. Ocul Surf 2011;9:212e26.
[938] Fraunfelder FT, Sciubba JJ, Mathers WD. The role of medications in causing
dry eye. J Ophthalmol 2012;2012:285851.
[939] Gu Q, Dillon CF, Burt VL. Prescription drug use continues to increase: U.S.
prescription drug data for 2007e2008. In: Statistics NCfH, editor. NCHS data
brief, no 42. Hyattsville, MD; 2010.
[940] Moss SE, Klein R, Klein BE. Long-term incidence of dry eye in an older
population. Optom Vis Sci 2008;85:668e74.
[941] Gold-von Simson G, Axelrod FB. Familial dysautonomia: update and recent
advances. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care 2006;36:218e37.
[942] Grandas F, Elston J, Quinn N, Marsden CD. Blepharospasm: a review of 264
patients. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1988;51:767e72.
[943] Lu R, Huang R, Li K, Zhang X, Yang H, Quan Y, et al. The influence of benign
essential blepharospasm on dry eye disease and ocular inflammation. Am J
Ophthalmol 2014;157:591e7. e591e592.
[944] Park DI, Shin HM, Lee SY, Lew H. Tear production and drainage after botu￾linum toxin A injection in patients with essential blepharospasm. Acta
Ophthalmol 2013;91:e108e112.
[945] Tsubota K, Fujihara T, Kaido M, Mori A, Mimura M, Kato M. Dry eye and
Meige's syndrome. Br J Ophthalmol 1997;81:439e42.
[946] Frueh BR, Musch DC, Bersani TA. Effects of eyelid protractor excision for the
treatment of benign essential blepharospasm. Am J Ophthalmol 1992;113:
681e6.
[947] Arthurs B, Flanders M, Codere F, Gauthier S, Dresner S, Stone L. Treatment of
blepharospasm with medication, surgery and type A botulinum toxin. Can J
Ophthalmol 1987;22:24e8.
[948] Gillum WN, Anderson RL. Blepharospasm surgery. An anatomical approach.
Arch Ophthalmol 1981;99:1056e62.
[949] Silveira-Moriyama L, Goncalves LR, Chien HF, Barbosa ER. Botulinum toxin a
in the treatment of blepharospasm: a 10-year experience. Arq Neuro￾psiquiatr 2005;63:221e4.
[950] Goebbels M. Tear secretion and tear film function in insulin dependent di￾abetics. Br J Ophthalmol 2000;84:19e21.
[951] (a) Misra SL, Patel DV, McGhee CN, Pradhan M, Kilfoyle D, Braatvedt GD,
Craig JP. Peripheral neuropathy and tear film dysfunction in type 1 diabetes
mellitus. J Diabetes Res 2014;2014:848659.
(b) Lv H, Li A, Zhang X, Xu M, Qiao Y, Zhang J, Yu L. Meta-analysis and review
on the changes of tear function and corneal sensitivity in diabetic patients.
Acta Ophthalmol 2014;92(2). e96ee104.
[952] Dogru M, Katakami C, Inoue M. Tear function and ocular surface changes in
noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Ophthalmology 2001;108:586e92.
[953] Eagle Jr RC, Font RL, Fine BS. The basement membrane exfoliation syndrome.
Arch Ophthalmol 1979;97:510e5.
[954] Roh YB, Ishibashi T, Ito N, Inomata H. Alteration of microfibrils in the con￾junctiva of patients with exfoliation syndrome. Arch Ophthalmol 1987;105:
978e82.
[955] Kozobolis VP, Detorakis ET, Tsopakis GM, Pallikaris IG. Evaluation of tear
secretion and tear film stability in pseudoexfoliation syndrome. Acta Oph￾thalmol Scand 1999;77:406e9.
[956] Kozobolis VP, Christodoulakis EV, Naoumidi II , Siganos CS, Detorakis ET,
Pallikaris LG. Study of conjunctival goblet cell morphology and tear film
stability in pseudoexfoliation syndrome. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
2004;242:478e83.
[957] Arita R, Itoh K, Inoue K, Amano S. Noncontact infrared meibography to
document age-related changes of the meibomian glands in a normal popu￾lation. Ophthalmology 2008;115(5):911e5.
[958] Den S, Shimizu K, Ikeda T, Tsubota K, Shimmura S, Shimazaki J. Association
between meibomian gland changes and aging, sex, or tear function. Cornea
2006;25:651e5.
[959] Arita R, Itoh K, Inoue K, Amano S. Noncontact infrared meibography to
document age-related changes of the meibomian glands in a normal popu￾lation. Ophthalmology 2008;115:911e5.
[960] Nien CJ, Massei S, Lin G, Nabavi C, Tao J, Brown DJ, et al. Effects of age and
dysfunction on human meibomian glands. Arch Ophthalmol 2011;129:
462e9.
[961] Sullivan DA, Sullivan BD, Ullman MD, Rocha EM, Krenzer KL, Cermak JM,
et al. Androgen influence on the meibomian gland. Investig Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2000;41:3732e42.
[962] Worda C, Nepp J, Huber JC, Sator MO. Treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca
with topical androgen. Maturitas 2001;37:209e12.
[963] Henriquez AS, Korb DR. Meibomian glands and contact lens wear. Br J
Ophthalmol 1981;65:108e11.
[964] Korb DR, Henriquez AS. Meibomian gland dysfunction and contact lens
intolerance. J Am Optom Assoc 1980;51:243e51.
[965] Mathers WD. Ocular evaporation in meibomian gland dysfunction and dry
eye. Ophthalmology 1993;100:347e51.
[966] McCulley JP, Dougherty JM, Deneau DG. Classification of chronic blepharitis.
Ophthalmology 1982;89:1173e80.
[967] Jung JW, Park SY, Kim JS, Kim EK, Seo KY, Kim TI. Analysis of Factors Asso￾ciated With the Tear Film Lipid Layer Thickness in Normal Eyes and Patients
With Dry Eye Syndrome. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2016;57:4076e83.
[968] Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Gouveia SM, Yokoi N, Voon LW. Functional aspects of the
tear film lipid layer. Exp Eye Res 2004;78:347e60.
[969] Heiligenhaus A, Koch JM, Kemper D, Kruse FE, Waubke TN. [Therapy of dry
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 505
eye disorders]. Klin Monbl Augenheilkd 1994;204:162e8.
[970] Nichols KK, Foulks GN, Bron AJ, et al. The international workshop on mei￾bomian gland dysfunction: executive summary. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2011;52:1922e9.
[971] Chhadva P, McClellan AL, Alabiad CR, Feuer WJ, Batawi H, Galor A. Impact of
Eyelid Laxity on Symptoms and Signs of Dry Eye Disease. Cornea 2016;35:
531e5.
[972] McCulley JP, Sciallis GF. Meibomian keratoconjunctivitis. Am J Ophthalmol
1977;84:788e93.
[973] Jester JV, Nicolaides N, Smith RE. Meibomian gland dysfunction. I. Keratin
protein expression in normal human and rabbit meibomian glands. Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1989;30:927e35.
[974] Ong BL, Hodson SA, Wigham T, Miller F, Larke JR. Evidence for keratin pro￾teins in normal and abnormal human meibomian fluids. Curr Eye Res
1991;10:1113e9.
[975] Borchman D, Foulks GN, Yappert MC, et al. Human meibum lipid confor￾mation and thermodynamic changes with meibomian-gland dysfunction.
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:3805e17.
[976] Straatsma BR. Cystic degeneration of the meibomian glands. AMA Arch
Ophthalmol 1959;61:918e27.
[977] Olami Y, Zajicek G, Cogan M, Gnessin H, Pe'er J. Turnover and migration of
meibomian gland cells in rats' eyelids. Ophthalmic Res 2001;33:170e5.
[978] Pult H, Riede-Pult BH, Nichols JJ. Relation between upper and lower lids'
meibomian gland morphology, tear film, and dry eye. Optom Vis Sci
2012;89:E310e5.
[979] Yin Y, Gong L. Uneven Meibomian Gland Dropout Over the Tarsal Plate and
its Correlation With Meibomian Gland Dysfunction. Cornea 2015;34:
1200e5.
[980] Finis D, Ackermann P, Pischel N, et al. Evaluation of Meibomian Gland
Dysfunction and Local Distribution of Meibomian Gland Atrophy by Non￾contact Infrared Meibography. Curr Eye Res 2015;40:982e9.
[981] Ban Y, Shimazaki-Den S, Tsubota K, Shimazaki J. Morphological evaluation of
meibomian glands using noncontact infrared meibography. Ocul Surf
2013;11:47e53.
[982] Eom Y, Lee JS, Kang SY, Kim HM, Song JS. Correlation between quantitative
measurements of tear film lipid layer thickness and meibomian gland loss in
patients with obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction and normal controls.
Am J Ophthalmol 2013;155:1104e10. e1102.
[983] Ji YW, Lee J, Lee H, Seo KY, Kim EK, Kim TI. Automated Measurement of Tear
Film Dynamics and Lipid Layer Thickness for Assessment of Non-Sjogren Dry
Eye Syndrome With Meibomian Gland Dysfunction. Cornea 2017;36:
176e82.
[984] Bron AJ, Benjamin L, Snibson GR. Meibomian gland disease. Classification
and grading of lid changes. Eye (Lond) 1991;5(Pt 4):395e411.
[985] Matsumoto Y, Shigeno Y, Sato EA, et al. The evaluation of the treatment
response in obstructive meibomian gland disease by in vivo laser confocal
microscopy. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2009;247:821e9.
[986] Mathers WD, Shields WJ, Sachdev MS, Petroll WM, Jester JV. Meibomian
gland dysfunction in chronic blepharitis. Cornea 1991;10:277e85.
[987] Arita R, Itoh K, Maeda S, Maeda K, Tomidokoro A, Amano S. Efficacy of
diagnostic criteria for the differential diagnosis between obstructive mei￾bomian gland dysfunction and aqueous deficiency dry eye. Jpn J Ophthalmol
2010;54:387e91.
[988] Yokoi N, Mossa F, Tiffany JM, Bron AJ. Assessment of meibomian gland
function in dry eye using meibometry. Arch Ophthalmol 1999;117:723e9.
[989] Yokoi N, Takehisa Y, Kinoshita S. Correlation of tear lipid layer interference
patterns with the diagnosis and severity of dry eye. Am J Ophthalmol
1996;122:818e24.
[990] Mathers WD, Daley TE. Tear flow and evaporation in patients with and
without dry eye. Ophthalmology 1996;103:664e9.
[991] Tomlinson A, Khanal S. Assessment of tear film dynamics: quantification
approach. Ocul Surf 2005;3:81e95.
[992] Lienert JP, Tarko L, Uchino M, Christen WG, Schaumberg DA. Long-term
Natural History of Dry Eye Disease from the Patient's Perspective. Ophthal￾mology 2016;123:425e33.
[993] Korb DR, Blackie CA. Meibomian gland diagnostic expressibility: correlation
with dry eye symptoms and gland location. Cornea 2008;27:1142e7.
[994] Korb DR, Blackie CA. Meibomian gland diagnostic expressibility: correlation
with dry eye symptoms and gland location. Cornea 2008;27(10):1142e7.
[995] Franck C. Fatty layer of the precorneal film in the 'office eye syndrome'. Acta
Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1991;69:737e43.
[996] Franck C, Palmvang IB. Break-up time and lissamine green epithelial damage
in 'office eye syndrome'. Six-month and one-year follow-up investigations.
Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1993;71:62e4.
[997] Fenga C, Aragona P, Di Nola C, Spinella R. Comparison of ocular surface
disease index and tear osmolarity as markers of ocular surface dysfunction in
video terminal display workers. Am J Ophthalmol 2014;158:41e8. e42.
[998] Schlote T, Kadner G, Freudenthaler N. Marked reduction and distinct pat￾terns of eye blinking in patients with moderately dry eyes during video
display terminal use. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2004;242:306e12.
[999] Tung CI, Perin AF, Gumus K, Pflugfelder SC. Tear meniscus dimensions in tear
dysfunction and their correlation with clinical parameters. Am J Ophthalmol
2014;157:301e10. e301.
[1000] Yokoi N, Komuro A. Non-invasive methods of assessing the tear film. Exp
Eye Res 2004;78:399e407.
[1001] Ibrahim OM, Dogru M, Takano Y, et al. Application of visante optical
coherence tomography tear meniscus height measurement in the diagnosis
of dry eye disease. Ophthalmology 2010;117:1923e9.
[1002] Arita R, et al. Increased tear fluid production as a compensatory response to
meibomian gland loss: a multicenter cross-sectional study. Ophthalmology
2015;122(5):925e33.
[1003] Fu YA. Ocular manifestation of polychlorinated biphenyls intoxication. Am J
Ind Med 1984;5:127e32.
[1004] McCulley JP, Shine WE. Meibomian secretions in chronic blepharitis. Adv
Exp Med Biol 1998;438:319e26.
[1005] Auw-Haedrich C, Reinhard T. Chronic blepharitis. Pathogenesis, clinical
features, and therapy. Ophthalmologe 2007;104:817e26. quiz 827e818.
[1006] (a) Kaercher T, Brewitt H. Blepharitis Ophthalmologe 2004;101:1135e47.
quiz 1148.
(b) Kaercher T, et al. Diagnosis of X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal
dysplasia by meibography and infrared thermography of the eye. Curr Eye
Res 2015;40(9):884e90.
[1007] McCulley JP, Dougherty JM. Bacterial aspects of chronic blepharitis. Trans
Ophthalmol Soc U. K 1986;105(Pt 3):314e8.
[1008] Dougherty JM, McCulley JP. Analysis of the free fatty acid component of
meibomian secretions in chronic blepharitis. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci
1986;27:52e6.
[1009] Bron AJ, Tiffany JM. The meibomian glands and tear film lipids. Structure,
function, and control. Adv Exp Med Biol 1998;438:281e95.
[1010] Watters GA, Turnbull PR, Swift S, Petty A, Craig JP. Ocular surface micro￾biome in meibomian gland dysfunction in Auckland, New Zealand. Clin Exp
Ophthalmol 2016;45:105e11.
[1011] Suzuki T, Teramukai S, Kinoshita S. Meibomian glands and ocular surface
inflammation. Ocul Surf 2015;13:133e49.
[1012] Czepita D, Kuzna-Grygiel W, Czepita M, Grobelny A. Demodex folliculorum
and Demodex brevis as a cause of chronic marginal blepharitis. Ann Acad
Med Stetin 2007;53:63e7. discussion 67.
[1013] Lacey N, Kavanagh K, Tseng SC. Under the lash: Demodex mites in human
diseases. Biochem (Lond) 2009;31:2e6.
[1014] Ng A, Bitton E, et al. Demodex infestation of the eyelash. Contact Lens
Spectr 2014;29:36e41.
[1015] Gao YY, Di Pascuale MA, Li W, et al. High prevalence of Demodex in eye￾lashes with cylindrical dandruff. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:
3089e94.
[1016] Randon M, Liang H, El Hamdaoui M, et al. In vivo confocal microscopy as a
novel and reliable tool for the diagnosis of Demodex eyelid infestation. Br J
Ophthalmol 2015;99:336e41.
[1017] Geerling G, Tauber J, Baudouin C, et al. The international workshop on
meibomian gland dysfunction: report of the subcommittee on management
and treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction. Investig Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2011;52:2050e64.
[1018] Cheng AM, Sheha H, Tseng SC. Recent advances on ocular Demodex
infestation. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2015;26:295e300.
[1019] Bron AJ, Mengher LS. Congenital deficiency of meibomian glands. Br J
Ophthalmol 1987;71:312e4.
[1020] Erickson RP, Dagenais SL, Caulder MS, et al. Clinical heterogeneity in lym￾phoedema-distichiasis with FOXC2 truncating mutations. J Med Genet
2001;38:761e6.
[1021] Narayanan S, Miller WL, McDermott AM. Expression of human beta￾defensins in conjunctival epithelium: relevance to dry eye disease. Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003;44:3795e801.
[1022] Di Iorio E, Kaye SB, Ponzin D, et al. Limbal stem cell deficiency and ocular
phenotype in ectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-clefting syndrome caused
by p63 mutations. Ophthalmology 2012;119:74e83.
[1023] Lin AN, Murphy F, Brodie SE, Carter DM. Review of ophthalmic findings in
204 patients with epidermolysis bullosa. Am J Ophthalmol 1994;118:
384e90.
[1024] Fine JD, Eady RA, Bauer EA, et al. The classification of inherited epi￾dermolysis bullosa (EB): Report of the Third International Consensus
Meeting on Diagnosis and Classification of EB. J Am Acad Dermatol
2008;58:931e50.
[1025] McDonnell PJ, Schofield OM, Spalton DJ, Eady RA. Eye involvement in
junctional epidermolysis bullosa. Arch Ophthalmol 1989;107:1635e7.
[1026] McDonnell PJ, Schofield OM, Spalton DJ, Mayou BJ, Eady RA. The eye in
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa: clinical and immunopathological find￾ings. Eye (Lond) 1989;3(Pt 1):79e83.
[1027] McDonnell PJ, Spalton DJ. The ocular signs and complications of epi￾dermolysis bullosa. J R Soc Med 1988;81:576e8.
[1028] Zierhut M, Thiel HJ, Weidle EG, Steuhl KP, Sonnichsen K, Schaumburg￾Lever G. Ocular involvement in epidermolysis bullosa acquisita. Arch
Ophthalmol 1989;107:398e401.
[1029] Tong L, Hodgkins PR, Denyer J, et al. The eye in epidermolysis bullosa. Br J
Ophthalmol 1999;83:323e6.
[1030] Jones SM, Smith KA, Jain M, Mellerio JE, Martinez A, Nischal KK. The Fre￾quency of Signs of Meibomian Gland Dysfunction in Children with Epi￾dermolysis Bullosa. Ophthalmology 2016;123:991e9.
[1031] Kiritsi D, Has C, Bruckner-Tuderman L. Laminin 332 in junctional epi￾dermolysis bullosa. Cell Adh Migr 2013;7:135e41.
[1032] Adamis AP, Schein OD, Kenyon KR. Anterior corneal disease of epi￾dermolysis bullosa simplex. Arch Ophthalmol 1993;111:499e502.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 506
[1033] Gans LA. Eye lesions of epidermolysis bullosa. Clinical features, manage￾ment, and prognosis. Arch Dermatol 1988;124:762e4.
[1034] Fine JD, Johnson LB, Weiner M, et al. Eye involvement in inherited epi￾dermolysis bullosa: experience of the National Epidermolysis Bullosa
Registry. Am J Ophthalmol 2004;138:254e62.
[1035] Fong K, Takeichi T, Liu L, et al. Ichthyosis follicularis, atrichia, and photo￾phobia syndrome associated with a new mutation in MBTPS2. Clin Exp
Dermatol 2015;40:529e32.
[1036] Eramo LR, Esterly NB, Zieserl EJ, Stock EL, Herrmann J. Ichthyosis follicularis
with alopecia and photophobia. Arch Dermatol 1985;121:1167e74.
[1037] Keyvani K, Paulus W, Traupe H, et al. Ichthyosis follicularis, alopecia, and
photophobia (IFAP) syndrome: clinical and neuropathological observations
in a 33-year-old man. Am J Med Genet 1998;78:371e7.
[1038] Cursiefen C, Schlotzer-Schrehardt U, Holbach LM, Pfeiffer RA, Naumann GO.
Ocular findings in ichthyosis follicularis, atrichia, and photophobia syn￾drome. Arch Ophthalmol 1999;117:681e4.
[1039] Macleod J. Three cases of “ichthyosis follicularis” associated with baldness.
Br J Dermatol 1909;21:165e89.
[1040] Oeffner F, Martinez F, Schaffer J, et al. Intronic mutations affecting splicing
of MBTPS2 cause ichthyosis follicularis, alopecia and photophobia (IFAP)
syndrome. Exp Dermatol 2011;20:447e9.
[1041] Oeffner F, Fischer G, Happle R, et al. IFAP syndrome is caused by deficiency
in MBTPS2, an intramembrane zinc metalloprotease essential for choles￾terol homeostasis and ER stress response. Am J Hum Genet 2009;84:
459e67.
[1042] Aten E, Brasz LC, Bornholdt D, et al. Keratosis Follicularis Spinulosa Deca￾lvans is caused by mutations in MBTPS2. Hum Mutat 2010;31:1125e33.
[1043] Kymionis GD, Klados NE, Kontadakis GA, Mikropoulos DG. Treatment of
superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis with topical tacrolimus 0.03% oint￾ment. Cornea 2013;32:1499e501.
[1044] Kymionis GD, Plaka A, Kontadakis GA, Astyrakakis N. Treatment of corneal
dellen with a large diameter soft contact lens. Cont Lens Anterior Eye
2011;34:290e2.
[1045] Rees TD, Jelks GW. Blepharoplasty and the dry eye syndrome: guidelines for
surgery? Plast Reconstr Surg 1981;68:249e52.
[1046] Shah CT, Blount AL, Nguyen EV, Hassan AS. Cranial nerve seven palsy and its
influence on meibomian gland function. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg
2012;28:166e8.
[1047] Takahashi Y, Kakizaki H. Meibomian Gland Dysfunction in Cranial Nerve VII
Palsy. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg 2015;31:179e81.
[1048] Wan T, Jin X, Lin L, Xu Y, Zhao Y. Incomplete Blinking May Attribute to the
Development of Meibomian Gland Dysfunction. Curr Eye Res 2016;41:
179e85.
[1049] Gilbard JP, Farris RL. Ocular surface drying and tear film osmolarity in
thyroid eye disease. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1983;61:108e16.
[1050] Kim YS, Kwak AY, Lee SY, Yoon JS, Jang SY. Meibomian gland dysfunction in
Graves' orbitopathy. Can J Ophthalmol 2015;50:278e82.
[1051] Jang SY, Lee SY, Yoon JS. Meibomian gland dysfunction in longstanding
prosthetic eye wearers. Br J Ophthalmol 2013;97:398e402.
[1052] Chang M, Lee H, Park MS, Baek S. The clinical characteristics and new
classification of sticky eyelid syndrome in East Asian patients. Acta Oph￾thalmol 2014;92:e667e670.
[1053] Reddy VC, Patel SV, Hodge DO, Leavitt JA. Corneal sensitivity, blink rate, and
corneal nerve density in progressive supranuclear palsy and Parkinson
disease. Cornea 2013;32:631e5.
[1054] Magalhaes M, Wenning GK, Daniel SE, Quinn NP. Autonomic dysfunction in
pathologically confirmed multiple system atrophy and idiopathic Parkin￾son's diseaseea retrospective comparison. Acta Neurol Scand 1995;91:
98e102.
[1055] Okun MS, McDonald WM, DeLong MR. Refractory nonmotor symptoms in
male patients with Parkinson disease due to testosterone deficiency: a
common unrecognized comorbidity. Arch Neurol 2002;59:807e11.
[1056] Mathers WD, Billborough M. Meibomian gland function and giant papillary
conjunctivitis. Am J Ophthalmol 1992;114:188e92.
[1057] Bonini S, Bonini S, Schiavone M, Centofanti M, Allansmith MR, Bucci MG.
Conjunctival hyperresponsiveness to ocular histamine challenge in patients
with vernal conjunctivitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1992;89:103e7.
[1058] Ciprandi G, Buscaglia S, Pesce G, et al. Effects of conjunctival hyperosmolar
challenge in allergic subjects and normal controls. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 1994;104:92e6.
[1059] Leonardi A, Lanier B. Urban eye allergy syndrome: a new clinical entity?
Curr Med Res Opin 2008;24:2295e302.
[1060] Mourao EM, Rosario NA, Silva L, Shimakura SE. Ocular symptoms in
nonspecific conjunctival hyperreactivity. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
2011;107:29e34.
[1061] Rummenie VT, Matsumoto Y, Dogru M, et al. Tear cytokine and ocular
surface alterations following brief passive cigarette smoke exposure.
Cytokine 2008;43:200e8.
[1062] Uchino Y, Kawakita T, Ishii T, Ishii N, Tsubota K. A new mouse model of dry
eye disease: oxidative stress affects functional decline in the lacrimal gland.
Cornea 2012;31(Suppl 1), S63e7.
[1063] Zheng Q, Ren Y, Reinach PS, et al. Reactive oxygen species activated NLRP3
inflammasomes initiate inflammation in hyperosmolarity stressed human
corneal epithelial cells and environment-induced dry eye patients. Exp Eye
Res 2015;134, 133e40.
[1064] Aragona P, Romeo GF, Puzzolo D, Micali A, Ferreri G. Impression cytology of
the conjunctival epithelium in patients with vernal conjunctivitis. Eye
(Lond) 1996;10(Pt 1):82e5.
[1065] Bielory L. Ocular allergy and dry eye syndrome. Curr Opin Allergy Clin
Immunol 2004;4:421e4.
[1066] Lemp MA, Crews LA, Bron AJ, Foulks GN, Sullivan BD. Distribution of
aqueous-deficient and evaporative dry eye in a clinic-based patient cohort:
a retrospective study. Cornea 2012;31:472e8.
[1067] Enriquez-de-Salamanca A, Bonini S, Calonge M. Molecular and cellular
biomarkers in dry eye disease and ocular allergy. Curr Opin Allergy Clin
Immunol 2012;12:523e33.
[1068] Dogru M, Gunay M, Celik G, Aktas A. Evaluation of the tear film instability in
children with allergic diseases. Cutan Ocul Toxicol 2016;35:49e52.
[1069] Toda I, Shimazaki J, Tsubota K. Dry eye with only decreased tear break-up
time is sometimes associated with allergic conjunctivitis. Ophthalmology
1995;102:302e9.
[1070] Bonini S, Mantelli F, Moretti C, Lambiase A, Bonini S, Micera A. Itchy-dry eye
associated with polycystic ovary syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol 2007;143:
763e71.
[1071] Fuchs E, Green H. Regulation of terminal differentiation of cultured human
keratinocytes by vitamin A. Cell 1981;25:617e25.
[1072] Checkley W, West Jr KP, Wise RA, et al. Maternal vitamin A supplementa￾tion and lung function in offspring. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1784e94.
[1073] Semba RD, de Pee S, Panagides D, Poly O, Bloem MW. Risk factors for
xerophthalmia among mothers and their children and for mother-child
pairs with xerophthalmia in Cambodia. Arch Ophthalmol 2004;122:
517e23.
[1074] Demissie T, Ali A, Mekonen Y, Haider J, Umeta M. Magnitude and distri￾bution of vitamin A deficiency in Ethiopia. Food Nutr Bull 2010;31:234e41.
[1075] Sommer A. Xerophthalmia and vitamin A status. Prog Retin Eye Res
1998;17:9e31.
[1076] Hess AF, Kirby DB. The Incidence of Xerophthalmia and Night-Blindness in
the United States-A Gauge of Vitamin A Deficiency. Am J Public Health
Nations Health 1933;23:935e8.
[1077] Sommer A, Green WR. Goblet cell response to vitamin A treatment for
corneal xerophthalmia. Am J Ophthalmol 1982;94:213e5.
[1078] Paton D, Mc LD. Bitot spots. Am J Ophthalmol 1960;50:568e74.
[1079] Rodger FC, Saiduzzafar H, Grover AD, Fazal A. A reappraisal of the ocular
lesion known as bitot's spot. Br J Nutr 1963;17:475e85.
[1080] Ferrari G, Vigano M. Images in clinical medicine. Bitot's spot in vitamin A
deficiency. N Engl J Med 2013;368. e29.
[1081] Sommer A, Emran N, Tamba T. Vitamin A-responsive punctate keratopathy
in xerophthalmia. Am J Ophthalmol 1979;87:330e3.
[1082] Sommer A, Emran N. Tear production in vitamin A-responsive xeroph￾thalmia. Am J Ophthalmol 1982;93:84e7.
[1083] Hatchell DL, Sommer A. Detection of ocular surface abnormalities in
experimental vitamin A deficiency. Arch Ophthalmol 1984;102:1389e93.
[1084] Puangsricharern V, Tseng SC. Cytologic evidence of corneal diseases with
limbal stem cell deficiency. Ophthalmology 1995;102:1476e85.
[1085] Rao V, Friend J, Thoft RA, Underwood BA, Reddy PR. Conjunctival goblet
cells and mitotic rate in children with retinol deficiency and measles. Arch
Ophthalmol 1987;105:378e80.
[1086] Kiorpes TC, Kim YC, Wolf G. Stimulation of the synthesis of specific gly￾coproteins in corneal epithelium by vitamin A. Exp Eye Res 1979;28:23e35.
[1087] Hassell JR, Newsome DA. Vitamin A-induced alterations in corneal and
conjunctival epithelial glycoprotein biosynthesis. Ann N. Y Acad Sci
1981;359:358e65.
[1088] Tei M, Spurr-Michaud SJ, Tisdale AS, Gipson IK. Vitamin A deficiency alters
the expression of mucin genes by the rat ocular surface epithelium. Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:82e8.
[1089] Hori Y, Spurr-Michaud SJ, Russo CL, Argueso P, Gipson IK. Effect of retinoic
acid on gene expression in human conjunctival epithelium: secretory
phospholipase A2 mediates retinoic acid induction of MUC16. Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:4050e61.
[1090] Kim SW, Seo KY, Rhim T, Kim EK. Effect of retinoic acid on epithelial dif￾ferentiation and mucin expression in primary human corneal limbal
epithelial cells. Curr Eye Res 2012;37:33e42.
[1091] Yamamoto Y, Yokoi N, Higashihara H, et al. Clinical characteristics of short
tear film breakup time (BUT) -type dry eye. Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi
2012;116:1137e43.
[1092] Uchino M, Yokoi N, Uchino Y, et al. Prevalence of dry eye disease and its risk
factors in visual display terminal users: the Osaka study. Am J Ophthalmol
2013;156:759e66.
[1093] Kawashima M, Uchino M, Yokoi N, et al. Associations between subjective
happiness and dry eye disease: a new perspective from the Osaka study.
PloS One 2015;10. e0123299.
[1094] Kawashima M, Uchino M, Yokoi N, et al. The Association between Dry Eye
Disease and Physical Activity as well as Sedentary Behavior: Results from
the Osaka Study. J Ophthalmol 2014;2014:943786.
[1095] (a) Uchino Y, Uchino M, Yokoi N, et al. Alteration of tear mucin 5AC in office
workers using visual display terminals: The Osaka Study. JAMA Ophthalmol
2014;132:985e92.
(b) Yokoi N, Georgiev GAs, Kato H, Komuro A, et al. Classification of Fluo￾rescein Breakup Patterns: A Novel Method of Differential Diagnosis for Dry
Eye. Am J Ophthalmol 2017;180:72e85.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 507
[1096] Shimazaki-Den S, Iseda H, Dogru M, Shimazaki J. Effects of diquafosol so￾dium eye drops on tear film stability in short BUT type of dry eye. Cornea
2013;32:1120e5.
[1097] Koh S, Inoue Y, Sugmimoto T, Maeda N, Nishida K. Effect of rebamipide
ophthalmic suspension on optical quality in the short break-up time type of
dry eye. Cornea 2013;32:1219e23.
[1098] Koh S. Clinical utility of 3% diquafosol ophthalmic solution in the treatment
of dry eyes. Clin Ophthalmol 2015;9:865e72.
[1099] Munger KL, Levin LI, O'Reilly EJ, Falk KI, Ascherio A. Anti-Epstein-Barr virus
antibodies as serological markers of multiple sclerosis: a prospective study
among United States military personnel. Mult Scler 2011;17:1185e93.
[1100] Simon KC, O'Reilly EJ, Munger KL, Finerty S, Morgan AJ, Ascherio A. Epstein￾Barr virus neutralizing antibody levels and risk of multiple sclerosis. Mult
Scler 2012;18:1185e7.
[1101] Ascherio A, Munger KL. EBV and Autoimmunity. Curr Top Microbiol
Immunol 2015;390:365e85.
[1102] Pflugfelder SC, Beuerman R, Stern DA. Dry eye and ocular surface disorders.
CRC Press; 2004.
[1103] Kam WR, Liu Y, Ding J, Sullivan DA. Do Cyclosporine A, an IL-1 Receptor
Antagonist, Uridine Triphosphate, Rebamipide, and/or Bimatoprost Regu￾late Human Meibomian Gland Epithelial Cells? Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2016;57:4287e94.
[1104] Sacks EH, Wieczorek R, Jakobiec FA, Knowles 2nd DM. Lymphocytic sub￾populations in the normal human conjunctiva. A monoclonal antibody
study. Ophthalmology 1986;93:1276e83.
[1105] Sacks E, Rutgers J, Jakobiec FA, Bonetti F, Knowles DM. A comparison of
conjunctival and nonocular dendritic cells utilizing new monoclonal anti￾bodies. Ophthalmology 1986;93:1089e97.
[1106] Brissette-Storkus CS, Reynolds SM, Lepisto AJ, Hendricks RL. Identification
of a novel macrophage population in the normal mouse corneal stroma.
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002;43:2264e71.
[1107] Hamrah P, Chen L, Zhang Q, Dana MR. Novel expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR)-3 and VEGF-C on corneal
dendritic cells. Am J Pathol 2003;163:57e68.
[1108] Hamrah P, Huq SO, Liu Y, Zhang Q, Dana MR. Corneal immunity is mediated
by heterogeneous population of antigen-presenting cells. J Leukoc Biol
2003;74:172e8.
[1109] Hamrah P, Liu Y, Zhang Q, Dana MR. Alterations in corneal stromal dendritic
cell phenotype and distribution in inflammation. Arch Ophthalmol
2003;121:1132e40.
[1110] Hamrah P, Liu Y, Zhang Q, Dana MR. The corneal stroma is endowed with a
significant number of resident dendritic cells. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2003;44:581e9.
[1111] Hattori T, Chauhan SK, Lee H, et al. Characterization of Langerin-expressing
dendritic cell subsets in the normal cornea. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2011;52:4598e604.
[1112] Shull MM, Ormsby I, Kier AB, et al. Targeted disruption of the mouse
transforming growth factor-beta 1 gene results in multifocal inflammatory
disease. Nature 1992;359:693e9.
[1113] Brunkow ME, Jeffery EW, Hjerrild KA, et al. Disruption of a new forkhead/
winged-helix protein, scurfin, results in the fatal lymphoproliferative dis￾order of the scurfy mouse. Nat Genet 2001;27:68e73.
[1114] Sharma R, Zheng L, Guo X, Fu SM, Ju ST, Jarjour WN. Novel animal models
for Sjogren's syndrome: expression and transfer of salivary gland
dysfunction from regulatory T cell-deficient mice. J Autoimmun 2006;27:
289e96.
[1115] Rahimy E, Pitcher III JD, Pangelinan SB, et al. Spontaneous autoimmune
dacryoadenitis in aged CD25KO mice. Am J Pathol 2010;177:744e53. Epub
2010 Jun 2021.
[1116] Jabs DA, Prendergast RA. Ocular inflammation in MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr mice.
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1991;32:1944e7.
[1117] Li S, Nikulina K, DeVoss J, et al. Small proline-rich protein 1B (SPRR1B) is a
biomarker for squamous metaplasia in dry eye disease. Investig Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:34e41.
[1118] Vosters JL, Landek-Salgado MA, Yin H, et al. Interleukin-12 induces salivary
gland dysfunction in transgenic mice, providing a new model of Sjogren's
syndrome. Arthritis Rheum 2009;60:3633e41.
[1119] Cha S, Nagashima H, Brown VB, Peck AB, Humphreys-Beher MG. Two NOD
Idd-associated intervals contribute synergistically to the development of
autoimmune exocrinopathy (Sjogren's syndrome) on a healthy murine
background. Arthritis Rheum 2002;46:1390e8.
[1120] Robinson CP, Yamachika S, Bounous DI, et al. A novel NOD-derived murine
model of primary Sjogren's syndrome. Arthritis Rheum 1998;41:150e6.
[1121] You IC, Bian F, Volpe EA, de Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC. Age-related conjunc￾tival disease in the C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 Mouse Model of Sjogren Syn￾drome develops independent of lacrimal dysfunction. Investig Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2015 Mar 10;2015. pii: IOVS-14-15668.
[1122] Bulosan M, Pauley KM, Yo K, et al. Inflammatory caspases are critical for
enhanced cell death in the target tissue of Sjogren's syndrome before dis￾ease onset. Immunol Cell Biol 2008;87:81e90.
[1123] Gandhi NB, Su Z, Zhang X, et al. Dendritic cell-derived thrombospondin-1 is
critical for the generation of the ocular surface Th17 response to desiccating
stress. J Leukoc Biol 2013;94:1293e301.
[1124] Tsubota K, Fujita H, Tadano K, et al. Improvement of lacrimal function by
topical application of CyA in murine models of Sjogren's syndrome. Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:101e10.
[1125] Lieberman SM, Kreiger PA, Koretzky GA. Reversible lacrimal gland-pro￾tective regulatory T cell dysfunction underlies male-specific autoimmune
dacryoadenitis in the nonobese diabetic mouse model of Sjogren syndrome.
Immunology 2015;145:232e41.
[1126] da Costa SR, Wu K, Veigh MM, et al. Male NOD mouse external lacrimal
glands exhibit profound changes in the exocytotic pathway early in post￾natal development. Exp Eye Res 2006;82:33e45.
[1127] D'Alise AM, Auyeung V, Feuerer M, et al. The defect in T-cell regulation in
NOD mice is an effect on the T-cell effectors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2008;105:19857e62.
[1128] Skarstein K, Wahren M, Zaura E, Hattori M, Jonsson R. Characterization of T
cell receptor repertoire and anti-Ro/SSA autoantibodies in relation to sia￾ladenitis of NOD mice. Autoimmunity 1995;22:9e16.
[1129] Xu H, Zhao Y, Li J, et al. Loss of NHE8 expression impairs ocular surface
function in mice. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2015;308:C79e87.
[1130] de Paiva CS, Volpe EA, Gandhi NB, et al. Disruption of TGF-beta Signaling
Improves Ocular Surface Epithelial Disease in Experimental Autoimmune
Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca. PLoS One 2011;6. e29017. Epub 22011 Dec
29014.
[1131] Yamachika S, Nanni JM, Nguyen KH, et al. Excessive synthesis of matrix
metalloproteinases in exocrine tissues of NOD mouse models for Sjogren's
syndrome. J Rheumatol 1998;25:2371e80.
[1132] Husain-Krautter S, Kramer JM, Li W, Guo B, Rothstein TL. The osteopontin
transgenic mouse is a new model for Sjogren's syndrome. Clin Immunol
2015;157:30e42.
[1133] Song XJ, Li DQ, Farley W, et al. Neurturin-deficient mice develop dry eye
and keratoconjunctivitis Sicca. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:
4223e9.
[1134] Kotzin BL, Palmer E. Genetic contributions to lupus-like disease in NZB/
NZW mice. Am J Med 1988;85:29e31.
[1135] Gilbard JP, Hanninen LA, Rothman RC, Kenyon KR. Lacrimal gland, cornea,
and tear film in the NZB/NZW F1 hybrid mouse. Curr Eye Res 1987;6:
1237e48.
[1136] Iwasa A, Arakaki R, Honma N, et al. Aromatase controls Sjogren syndrome￾like lesions through monocyte chemotactic protein-1 in target organ and
adipose tissue-associated macrophages. Am J Pathol 2015;185:151e61.
[1137] McClellan AJ, Volpe EA, Zhang X, et al. Ocular Surface Disease and
Dacryoadenitis in Aging C57BL/6 Mice. Am J Pathol 2014;184:631e43.
[1138] Kojima T, Wakamatsu TH, Dogru M, et al. Age-related dysfunction of the
lacrimal gland and oxidative stress: evidence from the Cu,Zn-superoxide
dismutase-1 (Sod1) knockout mice. Am J Pathol 2012;180:1879e96.
[1139] Ibrahim OM, Dogru M, Matsumoto Y, et al. Oxidative stress induced age
dependent meibomian gland dysfunction in Cu, Zn-superoxide dismutase-1
(Sod1) knockout mice. PLoS One 2014;9. e99328.
[1140] Shim GJ, Warner M, Kim HJ, et al. Aromatase-deficient mice spontaneously
develop a lymphoproliferative autoimmune disease resembling Sjogren's
syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:12628e33.
[1141] Tsau C, Ito M, Gromova A, Hoffman MP, Meech R, Makarenkova HP. Barx2
and Fgf10 regulate ocular glands branching morphogenesis by controlling
extracellular matrix remodeling. Development 2011;138:3307e17.
[1142] Horsley V, O'Carroll D, Tooze R, et al. Blimp1 defines a progenitor popula￾tion that governs cellular input to the sebaceous gland. Cell 2006;126:
597e609.
[1143] House JS, Zhu S, Ranjan R, Linder K, Smart RC. C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta
are required for Sebocyte differentiation and stratified squamous differ￾entiation in adult mouse skin. PLoS One 2010;5. e9837.
[1144] Mauris J, Dieckow J, Schob S, et al. Loss of CD147 results in impaired
epithelial cell differentiation and malformation of the meibomian gland.
Cell Death Dis 2015;6. e1726.
[1145] Cui CY, Smith JA, Schlessinger D, Chan CC. X-linked anhidrotic ectodermal
dysplasia disruption yields a mouse model for ocular surface disease and
resultant blindness. Am J Pathol 2005;167:89e95.
[1146] Kuramoto T, Yokoe M, Hashimoto R, Hiai H, Serikawa T. A rat model of
hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia carries a missense mutation in the
Edaradd gene. BMC Genet 2011;12:91.
[1147] Naito A, Yoshida H, Nishioka E, et al. TRAF6-deficient mice display hypo￾hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:8766e71.
[1148] Kenchegowda D, Swamynathan S, Gupta D, Wan H, Whitsett J,
Swamynathan SK. Conditional disruption of mouse Klf5 results in defective
eyelids with malformed meibomian glands, abnormal cornea and loss of
conjunctival goblet cells. Dev Biol 2011;356:5e18.
[1149] Meng Q, Mongan M, Carreira V, et al. Eyelid closure in embryogenesis is
required for ocular adnexa development. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2014;55:7652e61.
[1150] Thiboutot D, Sivarajah A, Gilliland K, Cong Z, Clawson G. The melanocortin 5
receptor is expressed in human sebaceous glands and rat preputial cells. J
Investig Dermatol 2000;115:614e9.
[1151] Huang J, Dattilo LK, Rajagopal R, et al. FGF-regulated BMP signaling is
required for eyelid closure and to specify conjunctival epithelial cell fate.
Development 2009;136:1741e50.
[1152] Miyazaki M, Man WC, Ntambi JM. Targeted disruption of stearoyl-CoA
desaturase1 gene in mice causes atrophy of sebaceous and meibomian
glands and depletion of wax esters in the eyelid. J Nutr 2001;131:2260e8.
[1153] Dahlhoff M, Camera E, Schafer M, et al. Sebaceous lipids are essential for
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 508
water repulsion, protection against UVB-induced apoptosis and ocular
integrity in mice. Development 2016;143:1823e31.
[1154] Hayashi Y, Liu CY, Jester JJ, et al. Excess biglycan causes eyelid malformation
by perturbing muscle development and TGF-alpha signaling. Dev Biol
2005;277:222e34.
[1155] Zouboulis CC, Boschnakow A. Chronological ageing and photoageing of the
human sebaceous gland. Clin Exp Dermatol 2001;26:600e7.
[1156] Chang SH, Jobling S, Brennan K, Headon DJ. Enhanced Edar signalling has
pleiotropic effects on craniofacial and cutaneous glands. PLoS One 2009;4.
e7591.
[1157] Cui CY, Durmowicz M, Ottolenghi C, et al. Inducible mEDA-A1 transgene
mediates sebaceous gland hyperplasia and differential formation of two
types of mouse hair follicles. Hum Mol Genet 2003;12:2931e40.
[1158] Jong MC, Gijbels MJ, Dahlmans VE, et al. Hyperlipidemia and cutaneous
abnormalities in transgenic mice overexpressing human apolipoprotein C1.
J Clin Investig 1998;101:145e52.
[1159] Plikus M, Wang WP, Liu J, Wang X, Jiang TX, Chuong CM. Morpho-regula￾tion of ectodermal organs: integument pathology and phenotypic varia￾tions in K14-Noggin engineered mice through modulation of bone
morphogenic protein pathway. Am J Pathol 2004;164:1099e114.
[1160] Dong F, Liu CY, Yuan Y, et al. Perturbed meibomian gland and tarsal plate
morphogenesis by excess TGFalpha in eyelid stroma. Dev Biol 2015;406:
147e57.
[1161] Cascallana JL, Bravo A, Donet E, et al. Ectoderm-targeted overexpression of
the glucocorticoid receptor induces hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
Endocrinology 2005;146:2629e38.
[1162] Kiguchi K, Bol D, Carbajal S, et al. Constitutive expression of erbB2 in
epidermis of transgenic mice results in epidermal hyperproliferation and
spontaneous skin tumor development. Oncogene 2000;19:4243e54.
[1163] Lin MH, Hsu FF, Miner JH. Requirement of fatty acid transport protein 4 for
development, maturation, and function of sebaceous glands in a mouse
model of ichthyosis prematurity syndrome. J Biol Chem 2013;288:
3964e76.
[1164] Jester JV, Rajagopalan S, Rodrigues M. Meibomian gland changes in the
rhino (hrrhhrrh) mouse. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1988;29:1190e4.
[1165] Park YG, Hayasaka S, Takagishi Y, Inouye M, Okumoto M, Oda S. Histological
characteristics of the pelage skin of rough fur mice (C3H/HeJ- ruf/ruf). Exp
Anim 2001;50:179e82.
[1166] Hassemer EL, Endres B, Toonen JA, Ronchetti A, Dubielzig R, Sidjanin DJ.
ADAM17 transactivates EGFR signaling during embryonic eyelid closure.
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:132e40.
[1167] Majumder K, Shawlot W, Schuster G, Harrison W, Elder FF, Overbeek PA.
YAC rescue of downless locus mutations in mice. Mamm Genome 1998;9:
863e8.
[1168] McMahon A, Lu H, Butovich IA. A role for ELOVL4 in the mouse meibomian
gland and sebocyte cell biology. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:
2832e40.
[1169] Toonen J, Liang L, Sidjanin DJ. Waved with open eyelids 2 (woe2) is a novel
spontaneous mouse mutation in the protein phosphatase 1, regulatory
(inhibitor) subunit 13 like (Ppp1r13l) gene. BMC Genet 2012;13:76.
[1170] Lu Q, Xin Y, Ye F, Foulks G, Li Q. 14-3-3sigma controls corneal epithelium
homeostasis and wound healing. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:
2389e96.
[1171] Chan CC, Gery I, Kohn LD, Nussenblatt RB, Mozes E, Singer DS. Periocular
inflammation in mice with experimental systemic lupus erythematosus. A
new experimental blepharitis and its modulation. J Immunol 1995;154:
4830e5.
[1172] Parfitt GJ, Xie Y, Geyfman M, Brown DJ, Jester JV. Absence of ductal hyper￾keratinization in mouse age-related meibomian gland dysfunction
(ARMGD). Aging (Albany NY) 2013;5:825e34.
[1173] Tanaka H, Harauma A, Takimoto M, Moriguchi T. Association between very
long chain fatty acids in the meibomian gland and dry eye resulting from n-
3 fatty acid deficiency. Prostagl Leukot Essent Fat Acids 2015;97:1e6.
[1174] Zhang X, Schaumburg CS, Coursey TG, et al. CD8(þ) cells regulate the T
helper-17 response in an experimental murine model of Sjogren syndrome.
Mucosal Immunol 2014;7:417e27.
[1175] Kawasaki S, Kawamoto S, Yokoi N, et al. Up-regulated gene expression in
the conjunctival epithelium of patients with Sjogren's syndrome. Exp Eye
Res 2003;77:17e26.
[1176] Jones DT, Monroy D, Ji Z, Pflugfelder SC. Alterations of ocular surface gene
expression in Sjogren's syndrome. Adv Exp Med Biol 1998;438:533e6.
[1177] Jones DT, Monroy D, Ji Z, Atherton SS, Pflugfelder SC. Sjogren's syndrome:
cytokine and Epstein-Barr viral gene expression within the conjunctival
epithelium. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1994;35:3493e504.
[1178] Zhang C, Xi L, Zhao S, et al. Interleukin-1beta and tumour necrosis factor￾alpha levels in conjunctiva of diabetic patients with symptomatic moderate
dry eye: case-control study. BMJ Open 2016;6. e010979.
[1179] Narayanan S, Miller WL, McDermott AM. Conjunctival cytokine expression
in symptomatic moderate dry eye subjects. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2006;47:2445e50.
[1180] Pflugfelder SC, Jones D, Ji Z, Afonso A, Monroy D. Altered cytokine balance
in the tear fluid and conjunctiva of patients with Sjogren's syndrome
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Curr Eye Res 1999;19:201e11.
[1181] Epstein SP, Gadaria-Rathod N, Wei Y, Maguire MG, Asbell PA. HLA-DR
expression as a biomarker of inflammation for multicenter clinical trials of
ocular surface disease. Exp Eye Res 2013;111:95e104.
[1182] Baudouin C, Brignole F, Pisella PJ, De Jean MS, Goguel A. Flow cytometric
analysis of the inflammatory marker HLA DR in dry eye syndrome: results
from 12 months of randomized treatment with topical cyclosporin A. Adv
Exp Med Biol 2002;506:761e9.
[1183] Brignole F, Pisella PJ, De Saint JM, Goldschild M, Goguel A, Baudouin C. Flow
cytometric analysis of inflammatory markers in KCS: 6-month treatment
with topical cyclosporin A. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:90e5.
[1184] Brignole F, Pisella PJ, Goldschild M, De Saint JM, Goguel A, Baudouin C. Flow
cytometric analysis of inflammatory markers in conjunctival epithelial cells
of patients with dry eyes. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:1356e63.
[1185] Sheppard Jr JD, Singh R, McClellan AJ, et al. Long-term Supplementation
With n-6 and n-3 PUFAs Improves Moderate-to-Severe Keratoconjuncti￾vitis Sicca: A Randomized Double-Blind Clinical Trial. Cornea 2013;32:
1297e304.
[1186] Tsubota K, Fukagawa K, Fujihara T, et al. Regulation of human leukocyte
antigen expression in human conjunctival epithelium. Investig Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 1999;40:28e34.
[1187] Tsubota K, Fujihara T, Saito K, Takeuchi T. Conjunctival epithelium
expression of HLA-DR in dry eye patients. Ophthalmologica 1999;213:
16e9.
[1188] Rolando M, Barabino S, Mingari C, Moretti S, Giuffrida S, Calabria G. Dis￾tribution of Conjunctival HLA-DR Expression and the Pathogenesis of
Damage in Early Dry Eyes. Cornea 2005;24:951e4.
[1189] Kunert KS, Tisdale AS, Stern ME, Smith JA, Gipson IK. Analysis of topical
cyclosporine treatment of patients with dry eye syndrome: effect on
conjunctival lymphocytes. Arch Ophthalmol 2000;118:1489e96.
[1190] Baudouin C, Liang H, Bremond-Gignac D, et al. CCR 4 and CCR 5 expression
in conjunctival specimens as differential markers of T(H)1/T(H)2 in ocular
surface disorders. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;116:614e9.
[1191] Versura P, Profazio V, Schiavi C, Campos EC. Hyperosmolar stress upregu￾lates HLA-DR expression in human conjunctival epithelium in dry eye pa￾tients and in vitro models. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:5488e96.
[1192] Yoon KC, Park CS, You IC, et al. Expression of CXCL9, -10, -11, and CXCR3 in
the tear film and ocular surface of patients with dry eye syndrome. Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51:643e50.
[1193] Gurdal C, Genc I, Sarac O, Gonul I, Takmaz T, Can I. Topical cyclosporine in
thyroid orbitopathy-related dry eye: clinical findings, conjunctival epithe￾lial apoptosis, and MMP-9 expression. Curr Eye Res 2010;35:771e7.
[1194] Aragona P, Aguennouz M, Rania L, et al. Matrix metalloproteinase 9 and
transglutaminase 2 expression at the ocular surface in patients with
different forms of dry eye disease. Ophthalmology 2015;122:62e71.
[1195] Wakamatsu TH, Dogru M, Matsumoto Y, et al. Evaluation of lipid oxidative
stress status in Sjogren syndrome patients. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2013;54:201e10.
[1196] Choi W, Lian C, Ying L, et al. Expression of Lipid Peroxidation Markers in the
Tear Film and Ocular Surface of Patients with Non-Sjogren Syndrome:
Potential Biomarkers for Dry Eye Disease. Curr Eye Res 2016;41:1143e9.
[1197] Cejkova J, Ardan T, Jirsova K, et al. The role of conjunctival epithelial cell
xanthine oxidoreductase/xanthine oxidase in oxidative reactions on the
ocular surface of dry eye patients with Sjogren's syndrome. Histol Histo￾pathol 2007;22:997e1003.
[1198] Cejkova J, Ardan T, Simonova Z, et al. Decreased expression of antioxidant
enzymes in the conjunctival epithelium of dry eye (Sjogren's syndrome)
and its possible contribution to the development of ocular surface oxidative
injuries. Histol Histopathol 2008;23:1477e83.
[1199] Coursey TG, Henriksson JT, Barbosa FL, de Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC. Inter￾feron-gamma-induced unfolded protein response in conjunctival goblet
cells as a cause of mucin deficiency in sjogren syndrome. Am J Pathol 2016.
S0002e9440:30005e30000.
[1200] Narayanan S, Miller WL, McDermott AM. Expression of human beta￾defensins in conjunctival epithelium: relevance to dry eye disease. Investig
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:3795e801.
[1201] Krenzer KL, Cermak JM, Tolls DB, Papas AS, Dana MR, Sullivan DA.
Comparative signs and symptoms of dry eye in primary and secondary
Sjogren € ’s syndrome and meibomian gland disease. Investig Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2000;40. S2864 (Abstract).
[1202] http://www.genecards.org/.
[1203] Tejera P, O'Mahony DS, Owen CA, Wei Y, Wang Z, Gupta K, et al. Functional
characterization of polymorphisms in the peptidase inhibitor 3 (elafin)
gene and validation of their contribution to risk of acute respiratory distress
syndrome. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2014;51(2):262e72.
[1204] Warren HS, Tompkins RG, Moldawer LL, Seok J, Xu W, Mindrinos MN, et al.
Mice are not men. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015;112. E345.
[1205] Sato EH, Ariga H, Sullivan DA. Impact of androgen therapy in Sjogren's €
syndrome: hormonal influence on lymphocyte populations and Ia expres￾sion in lacrimal glands of MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr mice. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci
1992;33(8):2537e45.
[1206] Tomlinson A, Bron AJ, Korb DR, Amano S, Paugh JR, Pearce EI, et al. The
international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of the
diagnosis subcommittee. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:2006e49.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 509
[1207] Sullivan DA, Hammitt KM, Schaumberg DA, Sullivan BD, Begley CG,
Gjorstrup P, et al. Report of the TFOS/ARVO Symposium on global treat￾ments for dry eye disease: An unmet need. Ocul Surf 2012;10:108e16.
[1208] Lambert RW, Smith RE. Pathogenesis of blepharoconjunctivitis compli￾cating 13-cis-retinoic acid (isotretinoin) therapy in a laboratory model.
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1988;29:1559e64.
[1209] http://ir.elevenbio.com/releasedetail.cfm?releaseid¼913561.
[1210] http://www.pemphigus.org/living-with-pemphigus-pemphigoid/
understanding-pemphigus-pemphigoid/.
[1211] Horwath-Winter J, Berghold A, Schmut O, Floegel I, Solhdju V, Bodner E,
et al. Evaluation of the clinical course of dry eye syndrome. Arch Oph￾thalmol 2003;121:1364e8.
[1212] Schaumberg DA, Nichols JJ, Papas EB, Tong L, Uchino M, Nichols KK. The
international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of the
subcommittee on the epidemiology of, and associated risk factors for, MGD.
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:1994e2005.
[1213] Choi W, Lee JB, Cui L, Li Y, Li Z, Choi JS, et al. Therapeutic efficacy of topically
applied antioxidant medicinal plant extracts in a mouse model of experi￾mental dry eye. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2016;2016:4727415.
[1214] She Y, Li J, Xiao B, Lu H, Liu H, Simmons PA, et al. Evaluation of a novel
artificial tear in the prevention and treatment of dry eye in an animal
model. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther 2015 Nov;31(9):525e30.
[1215] Wang YC, Li S, Chen X, Ma B, He H, Liu T, et al. Meibomian gland absence
related dry eye in ectodysplasin a mutant mice. Am J Pathol 2016
Jan;186(1):32e42.
[1216] Ding J, Sullivan DA. Aging and dry eye disease. Exp Gerontol 2012;47:
483e90.
[1217] Lim SY, Raftery M, Cai H, Hsu K, Yan WX, Hseih HL, et al. S-nitrosylated
S100A8: novel anti-inflammatory properties. J Immunol 2008;181:
5627e36.
[1218] Okanobo A, Chauhan SK, Dastjerdi MH, Kodati S, Dana R. Efficacy of topical
blockade of interleukin-1 in experimental dry eye disease. Am J Oph￾thalmol 2012 Jul;154(1):63e71.
[1219] Pflugfelder SC, Tseng SC, Sanabria O, et al. Evaluation of subjective as￾sessments and objective diagnostic tests for diagnosing tear-film disorders
known to cause ocular irritation. Cornea 1998;17:38e56.
[1220] Sternberg EM. Neural regulation of innate immunity: a coordinated
nonspecific host response to pathogens. Nat Rev Immunol 2006 Apr;6(4):
318e28.
[1221] Craig JP, Nichols KK, Akpek EK, Caffery B, Dua HS, Joo CK, et al. TFOS DEWS II
Definition and Classification report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:276e83.
[1222] Sullivan DA, Rocha EM, Aragona P, Clayton JA, Ding J, Golebiowski B, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Sex, Gender, and Hormones report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:
284e333.
[1223] Willcox MDP, Argüeso P, Georgiev GA, Holopainen JM, Laurie GW, Millar TJ,
et al. TFOS DEWS II Tear Film report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:366e403.
[1224] Belmonte C, Nichols JJ, Cox SM, Brock JA, Begley CG, Bereiter DA, et al. TFOS
DEWS II Pain and Sensation report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:404e37.
[1225] Wolffsohn JS, Arita R, Chalmers R, Djalilian A, Dogru M, Dumbleton K, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:539e74.
[1226] Stapleton F, Alves M, Bunya VY, Jalbert I, Lekhanont K, Malet F, et al. DEWS
II Epidemiology report. TFOS Ocul Surf 2017;15:334e65.
[1227] Gomes JAP, Azar DT, Baudouin C, Efron N, Hirayama M, Horwath-Winter J,
et al. TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:511e38.
[1228] Jones L, Downie LE, Korb D, Benitez-del-Castillo JM, Dana R, Deng SX, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Management and Therapy report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:
575e628.
A.J. Bron et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 438e510 510
Update
The Ocular Surface
Volume 17, Issue 4, October 2019, Page 842
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtos.2019.08.007
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Ocular Surface
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jtos
Corrigendum to “TFOS DEWS II pathophysiology report” [Ocul. Surf. 15 (3)
(2017) 438–510]
Anthony J. Brona,b,⁎
, Cintia S. de Paivac
, Sunil K. Chauhand
, Stefano Boninie
, Eric E. Gabisonf
,
Sandeep Jaing
, Erich Knoph
, Maria Markoullii
, Yoko Ogawaj
, Victor Perezk
, Yuichi Uchinoj
,
Norihiko Yokoil
, Driss Zoukhrim, David A. Sullivand
a Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
b Vision and Eye Research Unit, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK
c Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
d Schepens Eye Research Institute & Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
e Department of Ophthalmology, University Campus Biomedico, Rome, Italy
f
Department of Ophthalmology, Fondation Ophtalmologique Rothschild & Hôpital Bichat Claude Bernard, Paris, France
g Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
h Departments of Cell and Neurobiology and Ocular Surface Center Berlin, Charitee Universit€atsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
i
School of Optometry and Vision Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
j
Department of Ophthalmology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
k Department of Ophthalmology, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
l
Department of Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan
m Tufts University School of Dental Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
The attention of the authors has been drawn to a scattered number of reference errors in the above article. These citations errors have been
corrected in the corrigendum. The authors would like to apologise for any inconvenience caused.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtos.2019.08.007
DOI of original article: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtos.2017.05.011 ⁎ Corresponding author. Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
E-mail address: anthony.bron@eye.ox.ac.uk (A.J. Bron).
The Ocular Surface 17 (2019) 842
1542-0124/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
T
