TFOS DEWS II Definition and Classification Report
Jennifer P. Craig, MCOptom, PhD a, 1, *
, Kelly K. Nichols, OD, PhD b, 1
, Esen K. Akpek, MD c
,
Barbara Caffery, OD, PhD d
, Harminder S. Dua, MD, PhD e
, Choun-Ki Joo, MD, PhD f
,
Zuguo Liu, MD, PhD g
, J. Daniel Nelson, MD h, i
, Jason J. Nichols, OD, PhD b
,
Kazuo Tsubota, MD, PhD j
, Fiona Stapleton, MCOptom, PhD k
a Department of Ophthalmology, New Zealand National Eye Centre, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
b School of Optometry, University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA
c Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MA, USA
d Toronto Eye Care, Toronto, ON, Canada
e Academic Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Division of Clinical Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, UK
f Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea
g Department of Ophthalmology, Eye Institute of Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
h Specialty Care for HealthPartners Medical Group and Clinics, St Paul, MN, USA
i University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA
j Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo Dental College and Ichikawa Hospital, Tokyo, Japan
k School of Optometry and Vision Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
article info
Article history:
Received 5 May 2017
Accepted 6 May 2017
Keywords:
Aqueous deficient
Classification
Definition
Dry eye disease
Evaporative
Mechanism
abstract
The goals of the TFOS DEWS II Definition and Classification Subcommittee were to create an evidence￾based definition and a contemporary classification system for dry eye disease (DED). The new defini￾tion recognizes the multifactorial nature of dry eye as a disease where loss of homeostasis of the tear film
is the central pathophysiological concept. Ocular symptoms, as a broader term that encompasses reports
of discomfort or visual disturbance, feature in the definition and the key etiologies of tear film instability,
hyperosmolarity, and ocular surface inflammation and damage were determined to be important for
inclusion in the definition. In the light of new data, neurosensory abnormalities were also included in the
definition for the first time. In the classification of DED, recent evidence supports a scheme based on the
pathophysiology where aqueous deficient and evaporative dry eye exist as a continuum, such that ele￾ments of each are considered in diagnosis and management. Central to the scheme is a positive diagnosis
of DED with signs and symptoms, and this is directed towards management to restore homeostasis. The
scheme also allows consideration of various related manifestations, such as non-obvious disease
involving ocular surface signs without related symptoms, including neurotrophic conditions where
dysfunctional sensation exists, and cases where symptoms exist without demonstrable ocular surface
signs, including neuropathic pain. This approach is not intended to override clinical assessment and
judgment but should prove helpful in guiding clinical management and research.
© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The last three decades have seen the awareness of dry eye dis￾ease (DED) rise considerably around the world. Through the mutual
efforts of many organizations, much has been learned about the
basis and impact of this disease in the continued attempt to
improve clinical care for affected individuals. The Definition and
Classification Subcommittee arrived at a revised, evidence-based
definition of dry eye and a classification scheme consistent with
the collective current understanding of DED. Previous definitions
and classification schemes for dry eye formed the starting point,
and revisions were made to address perceived shortcomings, in the
context of the latest knowledge derived from the current literature,
and in a consensus-based manner that took into consideration the
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: jp.craig@auckland.ac.nz (J.P. Craig). 1 Subcommittee Co-Chair
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Ocular Surface
journal homepage: www.theocularsurface.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtos.2017.05.008
1542-0124/© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 276e283
responses and views of the TFOS DEWS II membership. Recognizing
the value of a global consensus for dry eye, the Definition and
Classification committee, with contributions from the wider TFOS
DEWS II membership that represents 23 countries, strived to create
a universally comprehensible and translatable definition.
While advances in current clinical, translational, and basic sci￾ence literature have clarified factors that characterize and
contribute to dry eye, many unanswered questions remain. This
report describes an updated global definition of dry eye and a
classification scheme designed to facilitate the clinical manage￾ment of dry eye on the basis of presenting features. It continues to
recognize the main etiological subtypes of dry eye as aqueous
deficient and evaporative, but acknowledges the frequent co￾existence and overlap of the subtypes. The revised classification
system directs the reader, in considering potential contributing
etiologic elements, toward the TFOS DEWS II Pathophysiology
report, where these elements are described in more detail [1].
2. Goals of the definition and classification subcommittee
The goals of the TFOS DEWS II Definition and Classification
Subcommittee were to create an evidence-based definition and a
contemporary classification system for DED.
3. Historical overview of dry eye
A review of the history behind our understanding of dry eye
helps place this most recent revised definition of DED in context.
Dry eye became formally defined as a disease state only a little over
30 years ago. By the early to mid-1990s, understanding of dry eye
had reached a critical point, with the field poised and eager for
rapid development. The first definition of dry eye, published in
1995 on the basis of consensus from the NEI/Industry working
group on Clinical Trials in Dry Eye, was as follows [2].
‘‘Dry eye is a disorder of the tear film due to tear deficiency or
excessive tear evaporation which causes damage to the inter￾palpebral ocular surface and is associated with symptoms of ocular
discomfort.”
Importantly, this early definition identified the relevance of tear
film quality as well as tear quantity as a cause of dry eye. For many,
the 1995 definition and report provided a blueprint for clinical,
translational, and basic research that would propel the field to the
next level. Of note is that the definition used the term “disorder”
and not “disease”.
Along similar lines, in 2006, a Delphi consensus group proposed
a new name for DED, reflecting the relevance of both tear quality
and quantity, namely ‘dysfunctional tear syndrome’. A classification
system was similarly created designed to guide treatment based on
disease with or without clinically evident inflammation [3].
In 2007, the first TFOS DEWS definition of dry eye was pub￾lished, following a three-year international consensus-based pro￾cess [4]. Scarcely 10 years after the publication of the initial NEI/
Industry report, significant advances in dry eye had been made. The
growing body of literature, and increased focus on diagnostics and
therapeutic approaches, led to a revised definition that centered on
the clinical effects and associated signs [4].
‘‘Dry eye is a multifactorial disease of the tears and ocular surface
that results in symptoms of discomfort, visual disturbance, and tear
film instability with potential damage to the ocular surface. It is
accompanied by increased osmolarity of the tear film and inflam￾mation of the ocular surface.’’
The original TFOS DEWS workshop was the first to acknowledge
that dry eye was indeed a disease entity, with a multifactorial eti￾ology. Again, symptoms were acknowledged to be paramount, but
were noted to include not only discomfort symptoms but also
symptoms of transient visual disturbance. While the sequelae of
dry eye were described in terms of symptoms and tear film insta￾bility, and that increased tear film osmolarity and inflammation
accompanied the disease, a statement regarding the mechanism or
etiology of DED was not included. Specifically, increased osmolarity
and inflammation were described as casual and not causal markers
of the disease.
4. Definition of dry eye disease
4.1. Important considerations
Following preliminary subcommittee discussions, a survey of
the TFOS DEWS II membership, conducted in late 2015, asked
specifically whether the original DEWS definition was acceptable
and should remain as the DEWS II definition. Of those who
responded, 77% voted for the definition to be changed. In forced
choice questioning, support was indicated for a simplified defini￾tion, or truncated version of the original, DEWS definition, however
almost 2/3 of the membership provided additional feedback, noting
specific concerns.
Specifically, it became clear that TFOS DEWS II members
acknowledged the significant role of inflammation and hyper￾osmolarity within the DED pathway, but challenged inclusion of
those precise terms in the definition, due to a perception that
clinical demonstration of these pathophysiological features was
required to validate a diagnosis of dry eye. To address this, and
other concerns, a group of representatives from the Definition and
Classification Subcommittee, the Harmonization and Steering
Committee, met in December 2016 in St. Paul, MN (USA), following
review of all submitted TFOS DEWS II reports, to finalize the defi-
nition proposed by the Definition and Classification Subcommittee.
A number of critical points were discussed, including acknowl￾edgement that a loss of tear film homeostasis can arise from a
multitude of factors that encompass eyelid and blink abnormalities,
in addition to ocular surface or tear component deficiencies [1,5].
These changes can induce focal or global tear film instability and
tear hyperosmolarity in response to excessive evaporation from the
ocular surface, and are regarded as significant entry points that
contribute to the pathogenesis and perpetuation of a cycle of
events, or “Vicious Circle”, in DED [4,6,7]. As characterizing the
precise interactions within this complex ocular surface and tear
film environment is challenging, it was deemed valuable to include
both the expected outcome of the disease (a clinically measurable
disruption of tear film homeostasis) as well as highlight key etio￾logical elements in the definition. The etiological elements are
important in maximizing specificity in defining dry eye, to differ￾entiate it from other ocular surface diseases. The breadth of po￾tential changes that might occur under the umbrella of homeostatic
imbalance allows the clinician, researcher, industry representative,
and/or regulatory body the autonomy to select the features most
appropriate as outcome measures in accordance with the specific
dry eye etiology under investigation. The focus on crafting a defi-
nition and classification with sufficiently broad interpretation to
allow for growth and flexibility in the field of dry eye research
remained paramount throughout the definition development
process.
Emerging over the last decade has been mounting evidence of
the potential role of neurosensory abnormalities in the under￾standing and management of DED. Neuropathic pain occurs due to
J.P. Craig et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 276e283 277
overt damage within the somatosensory nervous system, dis￾tinguishing it from DED. Nociceptive pain occurs in response to
local tissue damage. Corneal nociceptors, which transmit somato￾sensory “pain” information to the central nervous system, have the
potential to be sensitized by repeated physiological stimulation or
by noxious stimuli (e.g., hyperosmolarity or inflammation) [8].
While a comprehensive understanding of the exact role that
neurosensory abnormalities play within the pathophysiological
pathways of DED is yet to be reached, their potential, while we
await elucidation by further study, is deemed worthy of
recognition.
4.2. Additional definition considerations
Clinically, dry eye is often described as ‘chronic’ and ‘progres￾sive’, although there is currently insufficient evidence to support
inclusion of these terms in the definition. While omission of these
terms from the definition is warranted at present, additional
research, including dry eye natural history studies, should be per￾formed to inform future refinements to the definition terminology.
4.3. TFOS DEWS II revised definition
Thus, in summary, the TFOS DEWS II membership, on the basis
of current evidence, acknowledged that the definition needed to
recognize the multifactorial nature of DED, and there was agree￾ment that the unifying element in DED is the loss of homeostasis of
the tear film. Ocular symptoms, which include discomfort or visual
disturbance, or both, remain a central feature of the disease.
Conveying the key etiological roles of tear film instability, hyper￾osmolarity, ocular surface inflammation and damage was deemed
valuable in recognition of the cyclical disease process, with its
various entry points, as described in the Pathophysiology and Tear
Film reports [1,5]. Acknowledging the role that neurosensory ab￾normalities play in the etiology of the disease was also considered
worthy of inclusion within the definition, in light of the expanding
literature in this area [8].
This process led to the refined TFOS DEWS II global dry eye
definition, as follows:
“Dry eye is a multifactorial disease of the ocular surface charac￾terized by a loss of homeostasis of the tear film, and accompanied
by ocular symptoms, in which tear film instability and hyper￾osmolarity, ocular surface inflammation and damage, and neuro￾sensory abnormalities play etiological roles.”
5. Description of terms
The terminology used in the definition, including diction, word
order, emphasis, and accepted meaning were deemed critical in
creating an internationally accepted definition suitable for trans￾lation to multiple languages. The individual terms are described in
turn.
5.1. Multifactorial
The 2007 DEWS report recognized dry eye as a complex,
multifactorial disease that cannot be characterized by a single
process, sign or symptom. In medical terms, multifactorial is
described as having, or stemming from, a number of different
interacting causes or influences, as is the case in DED.
5.2. Disease
Since 2007, the definition has recognized dry eye as a disease.
Although definitions of ‘disease’ vary, it is generally understood to
be a disorder of structure or function or a condition of illness that
results in specific signs or symptoms. From a patient care
perspective, as well as providing global appreciation of dry eye as
an entity with pathologic and quality of life implications, it was
considered important to retain the term “disease” in the definition
[9].
5.3. Ocular surface
For the purposes of this definition, in alignment with previous
TFOS reports [4,10,11], the ocular surface is defined as comprising
the structures of the eye and adnexa, including the cornea, con￾junctiva, eyelids, eyelashes, tear film, main and accessory lacrimal
glands, and the meibomian glands. Thus, the tears, both in terms of
the individual components at the site of production, and as a film
on the ocular surface, are included within the term “ocular surface.”
5.4. Homeostasis of the tear film
The tear film has a vital role in providing lubrication and pro￾tection to the ocular surface, as well as maintaining a smooth,
refractive surface for optimal visual performance [5]. Physiologi￾cally, homeostasis describes the state of equilibrium in the body
with respect to its various functions, and to the chemical compo￾sition of the fluids and tissues [12]. When applied to DED, the
concept of disrupted tear film homeostasis acknowledges the
possibility of the many different changes that can occur in the tear
film and ocular surface [5], in response to one or more of the un￾derlying causes of dry eye [1]. Disruption of homeostasis is
considered to be the unifying characteristic that describes the
fundamental process in the development of DED.
5.5. Symptoms
The 1995 definition of dry eye identified discomfort as the
principal symptomatic response associated with dry eye [2], and
the 2007 definition expanded the concept of symptoms to include
visual disturbance. While terminology varies with language and
between different cultures, for example, the terms ‘gritty eyes’ or
‘stinging eyes’ are not frequently reported or understood in Man￾darin [13], ocular symptoms remain a fundamental component of
DED. The original TFOS DEWS report retained discomfort as a term
within the definition, but expanded the concept of symptoms to
include visual disturbance, in acknowledgement of the transient
blurring reported by affected individuals that corresponded with
disrupted tear surface quality [4]. TFOS DEWS II concedes that both
discomfort and visual disturbance symptoms remain fundamental
to DED, but to avoid restriction and maximizing relevance across
the world, has chosen the phrase “…accompanied by ocular
symptoms” for the current definition, to encompass a broader
range of possible symptoms associated with DED.
5.6. Etiological role
The term “etiological role” emphasizes the concept of an
involved pathway, without suggestion that specific features be
considered as measurement outcomes or required diagnostic
elements.
J.P. Craig et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 276e283 278
6. Classification schemes for dry eye disease
6.1. Historical background
Dry eye classification schemes serve to guide diagnosis and ul￾timately improve patient care through appropriate treatment. The
NEI/Industry Report (Fig. 1) [2] identified the two primary cate￾gories of dry eye as tear deficient and evaporative, and proposed, in
sub-classification, a range of intrinsic and extrinsic etiological fac￾tors believed to contribute to dry eye development within these
categories.
The classification scheme presented by the TFOS DEWS report
(Fig. 2) retained the two primary categories, aqueous deficient and
evaporative, although ‘tear deficient’ was redefined more specif￾ically as ‘aqueous deficient’ [4]. Once again, possible disease etiol￾ogies were listed in a sub-classification tree.
6.2. Challenges with previous classification schemes
During the TFOS DEWS II process a number of issues with the
interpretation of the original DEWS classification scheme were
highlighted. The first related to the distinction between the pri￾mary categories of dry eye. Co-existence of deficiencies in both tear
quantity and quality are not uncommon as a result of the cyclical,
self-perpetuating nature of DED. Once an individual enters into the
‘Vicious Circle’, irrespective of the entry point, the ensuing tear film
instability, hyperosmolarity, and inflammation serve to drive
further adverse change, often blurring the distinction between
underlying aqueous deficient and evaporative etiologies [1].
While potential overlap between the aqueous deficient and
evaporative categories had been acknowledged in the original
DEWS report [4], both in the text and in the schematic represen￾tation of the pathophysiological process, the classification scheme
was perceived by many to convey a sense of mutual exclusivity by
depicting the aqueous deficient and evaporative categories as
distinct. While the last decade of scientific evidence indicates that
the fundamental understanding has not shifted dramatically since
DEWS, it became apparent that addressing the common miscon￾ception associated with the classification scheme, by ensuring the
potential for overlap between these two categories was discussed,
would be important in TFOS DEWS II.
A second issue arose concerning the accuracy of placement of
some conditions within the DEWS sub-classification zone. The
purpose of including concurrent sub-class presentations had been
to aid clinicians in deriving an appropriate management plan.
However, recent evidence has suggested that a number of condi￾tions could arguably be listed under more than one heading. For
example, Sjogren syndrome, which, in the 1995 and 2007 reports €
[2,4] was classified exclusively as being due to aqueous deficiency,
has become increasingly recognized to possess, concurrently, an
evaporative component, due to associated meibomian gland
dysfunction (MGD) [14] that impacts predominantly upon tear￾lipid function.
Additional concern surrounded the level of specificity important
in DED diagnosis to avoid misdiagnosis of other ocular surface
diseases as DED. Such non-specificity in diagnosis increases the risk
of perceived treatment failure, resulting not only in disillusioned
patients and clinicians, but threatening the outcomes of clinical
trials and regulatory approval of novel therapies, through insuffi-
ciently precise inclusion criteria.
6.3. Creating the revised classification scheme
The current report attempts to remove any perception of ex￾clusivity in the classification of dry eye by indicating in the scheme
that aqueous deficient and evaporative dry eye diagnoses exist on a
Fig. 1. The 1995 Classification of dry eye [2]. Reproduced with permission from Eye & Contact Lens, previously CLAO J.
J.P. Craig et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 276e283 279
continuum rather than as separate entities. In diagnosis [15], and in
management [16], elements of each should be considered.
This dry eye classification scheme incorporates triaging ele￾ments to provide clarity in diagnosing DED (via the Diagnostic
Methodology report) [15], from which the various etiologies can be
considered (see Pathophysiology report) [1] and an appropriate
management plan can be instituted (see Management and Therapy
report) [16]. Appropriate management of differentially diagnosed
ocular surface conditions that masquerade as DED increases the
chances of successful treatment and allows any co-existing
component of the condition attributable to DED to be revealed
and suitably managed.
Sub-classification is recommended to be undertaken with
reference to the TFOS DEWS II Pathophysiology report [1], which
describes the wide range of possible DED subcategories and alludes
to their predominant etiology within the aqueous deficient and
evaporative continuum. Importantly, based on the evidence sum￾marized in the various TFOS DEWS II reports, the classification
scheme also considers the cases where patients exhibit dry eye
symptoms without evidence of obvious signs, or present with
marked signs but are absent of dry eye symptoms [8,17].
Fig. 3 incorporates a clinical decision algorithm, based on the
current knowledge of the pathophysiology of DED, which seeks to
promote accuracy in the classification of potential DED presenting
to the eye care practitioner.
7. Terminology in the classification of dry eye disease
As with the definition of DED, a detailed description of the
terminology is provided to clarify the decision-making behind the
development of the classification scheme. In the following section,
specific elements in the 2017 dry eye classification (Fig. 3) are
introduced and described.
7.1. Dry eye disease
Over twenty years of research and countless patient encounters
have promoted evolution of the understanding of DED. In align￾ment with the definition, the DED classification recognizes the
necessity of symptomatic involvement and the presence of asso￾ciated ocular surface signs in making a diagnosis of DED. For the
classification scheme presented here, DED is differentiated from
other ocular surface diseases, as well as in instances where there
are symptoms and no signs, or signs and no symptoms.
7.2. Other ocular surface disease differential diagnoses
Ocular surface disease is the broad category that is considered to
include a multitude of ocular surface conditions, some of which
closely mimic or masquerade as DED, and many that can occur
concurrently with DED [15]. Because of this complexity and over￾lap, dry eye is frequently treated as a diagnosis of exclusion. The
TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology report presents “triaging
questions” [15], which can be used, in combination with clinical
findings, to differentially diagnose other ocular surface conditions
that may require specific management, and result in relief of signs
and symptoms that might otherwise be attributed to DED.
It is important to note that many ocular surface diseases can be
co-morbid with dry eye, thus a step-wise approach to management,
with subsequent follow-up to monitor signs and symptoms is
warranted. For example, symptoms and tear film changes
commensurate with DED might well occur in a condition such as
lagophthalmos, due to poor lid to globe apposition, preventing
formation of a stable inter-blink tear film. However, resolution with
dry eye therapies alone is unlikely to succeed, as the surfacing
problem cannot be resolved without managing the lagophthalmos.
The converse of this scenario is that restoration of lid-globe appo￾sition through surgical management of the lagophthalmos has the
potential to fully resolve the dry eye symptoms and signs without
the need for dedicated dry eye therapies [16,19]. Further research is
needed regarding co-morbid ocular surface conditions that induce
a “secondary” dry eye.
7.3. Symptoms without signs: neuropathic pain
The Pain and Sensation Subcommittee report describes a clinical
scenario of neuropathic pain due to either a lesion or disease in the
somatosensory system, in which ocular pain symptoms dis￾proportionally outweigh the clinical signs [8]. This is an important
distinction in the diagnosis, and the required pain management
falls outside the scope of DED therapy [8].
Fig. 2. Dry eye classification from the 2007 DEWS Report [4]. Reproduced with permission from The Ocular Surface.
J.P. Craig et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 276e283 280
7.4. Symptoms without signs: pre-clinical dry eye state
It is further recognized that symptoms consistent with DED, but
in the absence of clinical signs, especially when the symptoms are
intermittent, might indicate a pre-clinical dry eye state, or a sce￾nario of emerging episodic dry eye. Ongoing evaluation for the
development of signs and the control of symptoms through edu￾cation and prevention are suggested. Studies evaluating the natural
history of short and long-term preventative efforts in this patient
group are needed [9]. Determination of whether such individuals
are at higher risk of developing iatrogenic DED, in comparison to
those who are non-symptomatic, is also deserving of further
investigation [17].
7.5. Signs without symptoms: reduced corneal sensitivity
Patients exhibiting signs of ocular surface disease, but reporting
no symptoms of discomfort, require consideration of whether dry
eye management is indicated. Corneal nerve damage secondary to
longstanding DED is a recognized phenomenon and the reduced
corneal sensitivity can mask discomfort. The dysfunctional sensa￾tion is a function of the underlying disease process. Other forms of
corneal disease exist, where corneal sensation is reduced, and these
should also be managed accordingly [17].
7.6. Signs without symptoms: predisposition to dry eye
Ocular surface changes in the absence of presenting symptoms
Fig. 3. Classification of dry eye disease (DED). The upper portion of the figure represents a clinical decision algorithm, beginning with the assessment of symptoms, and followed by
review for signs of ocular surface disease. DED exhibits both symptoms and signs, and can be differentiated from other ocular surface disease with the use of triaging questions and
ancillary testing [15]. It is to this DED group that diagnostic subtyping [15], and conventional dry eye management strategies [16], apply. Symptomatic patients without
demonstrable clinical signs do not fall into the DED group, but are differentiated into pre-clinical dry eye or neuropathic pain (non-ocular surface disease). Conversely, asymp￾tomatic patients exhib-iting signs are differentiated into patients with poor corneal sensitivity, or those with prodromal signs, who are at risk of developing manifest DED with time
or provocation, for example following ophthalmic surgery [17]. The lower portion of Fig. 3 represents the etiological classification of DED, and highlights the two predominant and
non-mutually exclusive categories; aqueous deficient dry eye (ADDE) and evaporative dry eye (EDE) [4]. Epidemiological and clinical evidence suggest that the preponder-ance of
DED is evaporative in nature [1,9,18], which is reflected in a greater proportion of Fig. 3 devoted to EDE than ADDE. While it is possible that ADDE can occur without obvious signs of
EDE and vice versa, as DED progresses, it is increasingly likely that characteristics of both ADDE and EDE will become evident [14]. Further subclas-sification of ADDE and EDE is not
detailed in Fig. 3, but is acknowledged to relate to a vast range of conditions, as detailed in the Pathophysiology report [1]. ADDE describes conditions affecting lacrimal gland
function. EDE is recognized to include both lid-related (e.g. MGD and blink-related) and ocular surface-related (e.g. mucin and contact lens-related) causes. Pathophysiological
details, for the etiological breakdown beyond differentiation into EDE and ADDE, are further detailed in the TFOS DEWS II Patho-physiology report [1] and Tear Film report [5] and
diagnosis and management algorithms are described in the respective TFOS DEWS II reports [15,16].
J.P. Craig et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 276e283 281
may be noted during a preoperative examination for cataract or
refractive surgery, for example, and signify early disease that might
place the patient at risk of developing symptomatic DED following
the surgical event [17]. Preventative management should be
considered, as described in more detail in the Iatrogenic report [17].
Recently, asymptomatic MGD has been reported with a prevalence
of double that of symptomatic MGD in a Caucasian population [20].
While there are limited data on the natural history of DED, symp￾toms do become more common with age [9] and individuals with
MGD are more likely to report an increase in severity of their
symptoms with time [21], all of which may support an argument
for intervention.
8. Classification of dry eye disease based on predominant
etiology
The classification scheme in Fig. 3 (lower half) depicts a scheme
based on the predominant, but often overlapping, etiologies of
aqueous deficient and evaporative dry eye. EDE is devoted a larger
area on the diagram than ADDE in recognition of the current un￾derstanding that an evaporative component to DED is more com￾mon than an aqueous deficient component [14,18]. Indeed, MGD, a
contributor to EDE, is considered the leading cause of dry eye in
clinic and population based studies [18,22,23]. The density of
shading at the extremes of the box indicates that in some cases
ADDE can occur without observable EDE and vice-versa. However,
it is acknowledged that as the disease progresses, it is more likely
that both components will become apparent clinically. Aqueous
deficiency describes conditions affecting the lacrimal gland, while
evaporative dry eye is understood to occur with conditions
affecting the eyelid (e.g. MGD and blink-abnormalities) or the
ocular surface (e.g. related to mucin deficiency or contact lens
wear). Further etiological breakdown is described in detail in the
Pathophysiology report [1]. In the management approach to restore
tear film and ocular surface homeostasis, the predominant category
(etiology) helps drive the primary therapeutic approach [4],
although it remains important that all aspects are considered when
determining the most likely combination of causative elements
unique to the individual patient with DED, in order to best target
the most appropriate management strategy.
9. Future directions
The definition and classification of DED has evolved consider￾ably over the past 20 years, informed primarily by a better under￾standing of the pathophysiology of the disease. The understanding
of DED could be further enhanced through continued research,
including prospective analysis of the natural history study of dry
eye, including treated and untreated DED for each of the disease
main subtypes, and those where either symptoms or signs are
absent, plus a more detailed understanding of the relationship
between DED and other overlapping or masquerading conditions.
The field has evolved considerably over this span of time, and the
next ten years promise to be as notable for the next generation of
dry eye clinicians and scientists.
Financial disclosures
J. P. Craig, Vice Chair: Oculeve, Allergan, Manuka Health NZ, E￾Swin, CooperVision, Alcon, Optima Pharmaceuticals, OPSM NZ,
Akorn, Medmont (F); Carl Zeiss Meditec, Eye Institute Auckland (C).
K. K. Nichols: Allergan, Bruder Healthcare Company (spouse)
Eleven Biotherapeutics, Johnson and Johnson Vision Care (spouse),
Kala, Oculus, Sarcode/Shire, TearScience (F); Alcon, Allergan,
Bausch & Lomb/Valeant, Eleven Biotherapeutics, Kala, Insite
Pharma, Parion, Sarcode/Shire, ScienceBased Health, Santen, Tear-
film Innovations (C); Shire (Spouse) (R).
J. Nichols: Johnson and Johnson Vision Care (F); Bruder
Healthcare Company (F); Alcon (spouse), Allergan (spouse), Eleven
Biotherapeutics (spouse), Kala, Oculus (spouse), Sarcode/Shire
(spouse), TearScience (spouse), (F); Alcon (Spouse), Allergan
(Spouse), Bausch & Lomb/Valeant (spouse), Eleven Biotherapeutics
(spouse), Kala (Spouse), Insite Pharma (spouse), Parion (spouse),
Sarcode/Shire (spouse), ScienceBased Health (spouse), Santen
(spouse), Tearfilm Innovations (spouse), (C); Shire (R).
B. Caffery: Allergan (F); Allergan, Labtician (C); Allergan (R).
H. Dua: Novartis (F); GlaxoSmithKline (I); Nicox, Thea, Allergan 
(C); NuVision (P); Alcon, Allergan, Bausch & Lomb, Nicox, Thea; 
NuVision (S).
E. Akpek: Allergan (F); Biogen, Seattle Genetics, GSK, Nicox (C).
K. Tsubota: Dai Nippon Insatsu, Echo Denki, JIN Co, Ltd., Kowa
Co. Ltd., MediProduct, Inc., Molecular Physiology Chemistry Labo￾ratory, Inc., Novartis Pharma K.K., Oryza Oil & Fat Chemical Co., Ltd.,
Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Toshiba Materials Co., Ltd.,
WAKASA SEIKATSU Corp. (F); QOV, Inc., Tear Solutions, Tissue Tech
Inc., Tsubota Laboratory, Inc. (I); Laboratoires Thea, Novaliq GmbH, 
SIFI, SpA (C); Functional Visual Acuity Meter, Moisture Glasses,
Menisometry Strips, Vitamin D Ointment (P); AMO Japan K.K.;
NIDEK Co. Ltd., Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co Ltd; Santen Pharma￾ceutical Co., Ltd. (R); Ocular Surface Research & Education Foun￾dation (Board of Directors); Qualitas Inc., (Advisory Board);
TearSolutions (Advisory Board); Yolia Health (Advisory Board);
Metro Biotech (Advisory Board); Nobel Institute of Medical Science;
(Spouse's company) (S).
C-K. Joo: N.
Z. Liu: Reilin Co. (C); Santen, Reilin, Alcon (R).
J. D. Nelson, Chair: TearSolutions (I, C, R), Santen (F, C), Editor in
Chief, Ocular Surface (F).
F. Stapleton: Alcon Laboratories, Allergan, CooperVision, John￾son & Johnson Vision Care, Stiltec (F); Nidek (C).
F (Financial Support), I (Personal Financial Interest), E
(Employment), C (Consultant), P (Patent), R (Recipient), N (No
Commercial Relationship), S (non-remunerative).
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the additional contribu￾tions of Anthony J. Bron, Gary N. Foulks, Lyndon Jones, James S.
Wolffsohn and Mark D.P. Willcox in refining the definition, and to
Nino Longo (Catania, Italy) and Sabrina Zappia (Rome, Italy) for
illustrative assistance with Fig. 3.
References
[1] Bron AJ, dePaiva CS, Chauhan SK, Bonini S, Gabison EE, Jain S, et al. TFOS DEWS
II Pathophysiology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:438e510.
[2] Lemp MA. Report of the national eye institute/industry workshop on clinical
trials in dry eyes. CLAO J 1995;21(4):221e32.
[3] Behrens A, Doyle JJ, Stern L, Chuck RS, McDonnell PJ, Azar DT, et al.
Dysfunctional tear syndrome: a Delphi approach to treatment recommenda￾tions. Cornea 2006;25(8):900e7.
[4] The definition and classification of dry eye disease: report of the Definition
and Classification Subcommittee of the International Dry Eye WorkShop. Ocul
Surf 2007;2007(5):75e92.
[5] Willcox MDP, Argüeso P, Georgiev G, Holopainen J, Laurie G, Millar T, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Tear Film report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:366e403.
[6] Baudouin C. A new approach for better comprehension of diseases of the
ocular surface. J Fr Ophtalmol 2007;30:239e46.
[7] Baudouin C, Messmer EM, Aragona P, Geerling G, Akova YA, Benítez-del￾Castillo J, et al. Revisiting the vicious circle of dry eye disease: a focus on the
pathophysiology of meibomian gland dysfunction. Br J Ophthalmol
2016;100(3):300e6.
[8] Belmonte C, Nichols JJ, Cox SM, Brock JA, Begley CG, Bereiter DA, et al. TFOS
DEWS II pain and sensation report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:404e37.
[9] Stapleton F, Alves M, Bunya VY, Jalbert I, Lekhanont K, Malet F, et al. TFOS
J.P. Craig et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 276e283 282
DEWS II Epidemiology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:334e65.
[10] Nichols JJ, Willcox MD, Bron AJ, Belmonte C, Ciolino JB, Craig JP, et al. The TFOS
international workshop on contact lens discomfort: executive summary.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:TFOS7e13.
[11] Nelson JD, Shimazaki J, Benitez-del-Castillo JM, Craig JP, McCulley JP, Den S,
et al. The international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of
the definition and classification subcommittee. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2011;52(4):1930e7.
[12] Merriam-Webster Dictionary 2016. https://www.merriam-webster.com.
[13] Chao C, Golebiowski B, Cui Y, Stapleton F. Development of a Chinese version of
the ocular comfort index. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55(6):3562e71.
[14] Shimazaki J, Goto E, Ono M, Shimmura S, Tsubota K. Meibomian gland
dysfunction in patients with Sjogren syndrome. Ophthalmology 1998;105(8): €
1485e8.
[15] Wolffsohn JS, Arita R, Chalmers R, Djalilian A, Dogru M, Dumbleton K, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:539e74.
[16] Jones L, Downie LE, Korb D, Benitez-del-Castillo JM, Dana R, Deng SX, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Management and Therapy report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:575e628.
[17] Gomes JAP, Azar DT, Baudouin C, Efron N, Hirayama M, Horwath-Winter J,
et al. TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:511e38.
[18] Lemp MA, Crews LA, Bron AJ, Foulks GN, Sullivan BD. Distribution of aqueous￾deficient and evaporative dry eye in a clinic-based patient cohort: a retro￾spective study. Cornea 2012;31(5):472e8.
[19] Latkany RL, Lock B, Speaker M. Nocturnal lagophthalmos: an overview and
classification. Ocul Surf 2006;4(1):44e53.
[20] Viso E, Rodríguez-Ares MT, Abelenda D, Oubina B, Gude F. Prevalence of ~
asymptomatic and symptomatic meibomian gland dysfunction in the general
population of Spain. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53(6):2601e6.
[21] Lienert JP, Tarko L, Uchino M, Christen WG, Schaumberg DA. Long-term nat￾ural history of dry eye disease from the Patient's perspective. Ophthalmology
2016;123(2):425e33.
[22] Viso E, Gude F, Rodríguez-Ares MT. The association of meibomian gland
dysfunction and other common ocular diseases with dry eye: a population￾based study in Spain. Cornea 2011;30(1):1e6.
[23] Tong L, Chaurasia SS, Mehta JS, Beuerman RW. Screening for meibomian gland
disease: its relation to dry eye subtypes and symptoms in a tertiary referral
clinic in Singapore. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51:3449e54.
J.P. Craig et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 276e283 283
