TFOS DEWS II pain and sensation report
Carlos Belmonte, MD, PhD a, 1, *
, Jason J. Nichols, OD, PhD b, 1
, Stephanie M. Cox, OD b
,
James A. Brock, D.Phil c
, Carolyn G. Begley, OD, MS d
, David A. Bereiter, PhD e
,
Darlene A. Dartt, PhD f, g
, Anat Galor, MD h, i
, Pedram Hamrah, MD j, k
,
Jason J. Ivanusic, PhD c
, Deborah S. Jacobs, MD l
, Nancy A. McNamara, OD, PhD m, n
,
Mark I. Rosenblatt, MD, PhD o
, Fiona Stapleton, MCOptom, PhD p
,
James S. Wolffsohn, FCOptom, PhD q
a Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante, University Miguel Hernandez-CSIC, Instituto Fernandez-Vega, Oviedo University, Spain
b School of Optometry, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA
c Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 3010, Australia
d School of Optometry, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA
e School of Dentistry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
f Schepens Eye Research Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Boston, MA, USA
g Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA
h Surgical Services, Miami Veterans Administration Medical Center, Miami, FL, USA
i Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
j Cornea Service, New England Eye Center/Tufts Medical Center, Department of Ophthalmology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
k Center for Translational Ocular Immunology, Tufts Medical Center, Department of Ophthalmology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA l BostonSight, Needham and Harvard Medical School, MA, USA
m School of Optometry and Vision Science Program, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA n Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
o Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, Illinois Eye and Ear Infirmary, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA p School of Optometry and Vision Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
q Ophthalmic Research Group, Aston University, Birmingham, UK
article info
Article history:
Received 30 April 2017
Accepted 1 May 2017
Keywords:
Pain
Neuropathic pain
Dry eye disease
Ocular surface dryness
Peripheral sensory nerves
TRP channels
Cold receptors
Polymodal nociceptors
Mechano-nociceptors
Trigeminal brainstem nuclear complex
Central nervous system
Sensation
Corneal esthesiometry
In vivo confocal microscopy
abstract
Pain associated with mechanical, chemical, and thermal heat stimulation of the ocular surface is mediated by
trigeminal ganglion neurons, while cold thermoreceptors detect wetness and reflexly maintain basal tear
production and blinking rate. These neurons project into two regions of the trigeminal brain stem nuclear
complex: ViVc, activated by changes in the moisture of the ocular surface and VcC1, mediating sensory￾discriminative aspects of ocular pain and reflex blinking. ViVc ocular neurons project to brain regions that
control lacrimation and spontaneous blinking and to the sensory thalamus. Secretion of the main lacrimal
gland is regulated dominantly by autonomic parasympathetic nerves, reflexly activated by eye surface sen￾sory nerves. These also evoke goblet cell secretion through unidentified efferent fibers. Neural pathways
involved in the regulation of meibomian gland secretion or mucin release have not been identified.
In dry eye disease, reduced tear secretion leads to inflammation and peripheral nerve damage. Inflam￾mation causes sensitization of polymodal and mechano-nociceptor nerve endings and an abnormal increase
in cold thermoreceptor activity, altogether evoking dryness sensations and pain. Long-term inflammation
and nerve injury alter gene expression of ion channels and receptors at terminals and cell bodies of trigeminal
ganglion and brainstem neurons, changing their excitability, connectivity and impulse firing. Perpetuation of
molecular, structural and functional disturbances in ocular sensory pathways ultimately leads to dysestesias
and neuropathic pain referred to the eye surface. Pain can be assessed with a variety of questionaires while the
status of corneal nerves is evaluated with esthesiometry and with in vivo confocal microscopy.
© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: carlos.belmonte@umh.es (C. Belmonte). 1 Subcommittee Co-Chair.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Ocular Surface
journal homepage: www.theocularsurface.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtos.2017.05.002
1542-0124/© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437
1. Introduction
The objective of the TFOS DEWS II Pain and Sensation Subcom￾mittee was to highlight the neurobiological mechanisms
that underpin discomfort accompanying dry eye disease (DED). In
2013, the TFOS International Workshop on Contact Lens Discomfort
produced a report of its Subcommittee on Neurobiology [1]
that included a detailed description of the morphological and
immunocytochemical characteristics of ocular surface sensory
innervation in experimental animals and in humans. It also covered
the basic molecular, cellular and integrative mechanisms underlying
the detection and processing of environmental and endogenous
stimuli acting on the eye at various levels of the brain and spinal cord,
which lead ultimately to conscious sensory experiences and behav￾ioral and autonomic adaptive responses. This current report has been
updated with new data on the genetic and molecular signature of
corneal sensory neurons and their peripheral nerve branches, and
recent information on the changes that take place in ocular surface
sensory pathways as a result of the corneal and conjunctival distur￾bances that occur during DED, including the cross talk between im￾mune and neural elements. New experimental and clinical data on
the psychophysical characteristics and possible neural mechanisms
underlying conscious pain and discomfort sensations in DED are
reported, discussing their similarities and differences with the
various types of pain experienced in other human pathologies.
Finally, the current report describes the methods available for the
experimental and clinical exploration in humans of the neurobio￾logical parameters involved in DED symptoms.
The use of the term ‘pain’ in eye care has been traditionally
limited to a small number of pathological conditions, because
conscious sensations originating at the ocular surface do not
generally have a diagnostic interest. In fact, most of the prevalent
sight-threatening eye diseases, like open angle glaucoma, cataract
or retinal pathologies, occur and progress without pain [2].
Moderately unpleasant sensations accompany many common
ocular surface diseases (allergic conjunctivitis, DED), but they have
been described clinically, in most cases, with terms such as ‘dry￾ness,’ ‘discomfort,’ and ‘itch,’ without making a direct, explicit as￾sociation with pain sensations. Until a few decades ago, the term
pain as a symptom of eye pathology was generally reserved for the
sensations accompanying predominantly traumatic or infectious
keratitis, iridocyclitis, angle closure glaucoma, and other entities
[2]. This evolution of our understanding of ocular pain has parallels
to pain in general, which was initially described by Celsus, a Roman
scholar, as one of the signs (dolor) of inflammation, and has evolved
ever since [3].
Reports of pain after photorefractive surgery procedures and the
‘discomfort’ experienced by contact lens wearers finally directed
the attention of eye care practitioners and researchers toward the
origin and mechanisms of the unpleasant, and sometimes overtly
painful, sensations arising from the ocular surface. This interest
extended to ‘dryness’ sensations experienced by patients suffering
from DED and by patients experiencing severe ocular surface
symptoms, but with minimal or no clinical signs on slit-lamp ex￾amination. The underlying neurobiological mechanisms producing
these sensations appear to be consistent with those mediating
ocular pain in other eye pathologies, and unpleasant dry eye sen￾sations should be considered and studied as a specific form of eye
pain occurring in this particular disease.
The International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) defines
pain as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associ￾ated with actual or potential tissue damage, or described in terms of
such damage” [4]. Various types of pain have been distinguished
based on etiology, duration or clinical features.
Nociceptive pain is the pain that arises from actual or threatened
damage to tissues and is due to the activation of nociceptors.
Nociceptors are sensory receptors of the peripheral somatosensory
nervous system that are capable of transducing and encoding
potentially tissue-damaging noxious mechanical, thermal and
chemical stimuli, thereby signaling the location, size, intensity and
duration of tissue injury.
Neuropathic pain is defined by the IASP as pain caused by a
lesion or disease of the somatosensory nervous system, in contrast
with nociceptive pain produced by the normal function of noci￾ceptors. Neuropathic pain is a clinical description, which requires a
demonstrable lesion or a disease of the somatosensory nervous
system that satisfies established neurological diagnostic criteria [4],
and is also commonly referred to as pathological pain or pain
without biological value. Neuropathic pain has been categorized
etiologically (eg degenerative, traumatic, infectious, metabolic, and
toxic) and anatomically (into peripheral vs central) because this
class of pain is generated by a functional disturbance that may
occur at different levels of the neuroaxis. The nature of the injury to
peripheral sensory nerves (peripheral neuropathic pain) de￾termines the development of ectopic activity and abnormal excit￾ability of peripheral nerve terminals and nociceptive neurons of
sensory ganglia. Altered gene expression triggered by peripheral
axotomy, cell body damage and/or by local inflammation is a
common feature of peripheral neuropathic pain [5]. The abnormal
activity caused by peripheral neuronal injury may produce
anatomical and functional changes in the distribution and efficacy
of synaptic connections arriving from the periphery to the central
nervous system, altering the excitability of second-order and
higher-order projection neurons of the pain pathways. Excitability
of central pain pathways is further enhanced by local activation of
microglia and impairment of the inhibitory descending modulation
arriving from higher CNS areas [6]. Central neuropathic pain also
may be generated by malfunction of central somatosensory ner￾vous system structures due to lesion or disease, for example
trauma, stroke or genetic abnormality.
Acute nociceptive pain results from high intensity stimulation of
nociceptors and usually persists as long as the stimulus is applied.
Inflammation develops in parallel to tissue injury or infection,
reflecting the activation of the immune system. Inflammatory
mediators modify the normal responsiveness of nociceptors
(’sensitization’) by decreasing their threshold for activation and/or
increasing suprathreshold responses, often causing spontaneous
discharges. Inflammatory pain has an adaptive role, offering a
longer term protection during the healing period. When pain per￾sists past the normal time of healing, it becomes chronic or
persistent pain [7]. The definition of chronic pain is not precise and
may last less than one month, or more frequently, over six months.
Among its salient characteristics are the absence of apparent bio￾logical value and the frequent tendency to become severe and
intractable [4,7].
Itch is a complex unpleasant sensation, often present in the eye,
with many elements in common with pain, although its sensory
quality and associated urge to scratch make it a distinct perceptual
entity. Experimental evidence in the skin indicates that itch is
evoked by activation of specific receptors on peripheral sensory
fibers of sensory neurons (pruriceptive neurons) in the trigeminal
and dorsal root ganglia (DRG) [8]. These sensory neurons,
functionally distinct from nociceptors, are often subdivided into
chemically-sensitive and mechanically-sensitive itch neurons with
characteristic cell and molecular signatures and separate functional
sensory pathways. Peripheral itch-mediating pathways are segre￾gated from those signaling acute pain, although the pathways
interact at various levels of the CNS to finally evoke conscious
sensations of either itch or pain [9]. In the skin, pruritus accom￾panies a large variety of chronic cutaneous and systemic diseases
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 405
like xerosis (dry skin) [10], while ocular itch is often a pathogno￾monic sign of allergic conjunctivitis [11]. Finally, it is important to
note that the above mechanisms do not necessarily occur exclu￾sively, but may be present concurrently, and thus can be chal￾lenging to discern for clinicians.
2. Neurobiological features in normal/non dry eye disease
2.1. Peripheral afferent pathways for transduction of physical and
chemical stimuli at the ocular surface
The eye and periocular tissues are potential sources of pain and
itch resulting from pathological processes affecting directly or
indirectly trigeminal sensory nerves. In DED, unpleasant dryness
sensation, the most precocious and main symptom of the disease
[12], implies activation of sensory nerves subserving nociception at
the ocular surface and the subsequent sensory processing of this
information.
The ocular surface and contiguous areas of the upper and lower
eyelids are supplied by sensory fibers of the trigeminal nerve. Of
these, the cornea is the most richly innervated of all ocular struc￾tures and the most densely innervated surface epithelium in the
human body, while the conjunctiva and eyelid margins are
understood to receive, comparatively, a less dense innervation.
2.1.1. Trigeminal ganglion
2.1.1.1. Nerve projections to the eye. Sensory neurons that supply
the ocular surface have their cell bodies in the ophthalmic and
maxillary regions of the trigeminal ganglion (TG) [13e16]. Esti￾mates in mice, rats, cats and monkeys indicate that between 50 and
450 TG neurons supply the cornea and these constitute about 2% of
all TG neurons [13,17e19]. Sensory nerves to the cornea and the
anterior bulbar conjunctiva travel to the eye initially via the naso￾ciliary branch of the ophthalmic nerve, and then via the long ciliary
nerves and the communicating branch to the ciliary ganglion. The
ciliary ganglion gives rise to the short ciliary nerves, which contain
both sensory and autonomic fibers. The long and short ciliary
nerves pierce the sclera at the back of the eye and run forward to
the anterior segment in the suprachoroidal space [20,21]. The
ciliary nerves divide to form multiple branches that arrive at the
corneal limbus at equidistant intervals around its circumference
where they form the circumferentially arranged pericorneal plexus
[22]. The sensory and autonomic nerve fibers supplying the cornea
and limbal conjunctiva exit anteriorly from this plexus. The
supratrochlear, supraorbital, infratrochlear, and lacrimal branches
of the ophthalmic nerve as well as the infraorbital nerve branch of
the maxillary nerve supply the innervation of the remaining bulbar
conjunctiva, entire palpebral conjunctiva, and the skin covering the
eyelid margins (Fig. 1) [20,23e25].
2.1.1.2. Molecular, genetic and electrophysiological diversity of TG
ocular neurons. Several studies have investigated the membrane
properties and ion channel currents of corneal TG neurons using
intracellular, whole cell or calcium imaging recordings. These in￾vestigations have been performed in dissociated TG neurons
[26e28] and in neurons of intact TGs isolated in vitro [29,30] or
recorded in vivo, in anesthetized mice [31]. In summary, the elec￾trophysiological studies have demonstrated that corneal sensory
neurons are either thinly myelinated (Ad-type) or unmyelinated (C￾type) and have heterogeneous passive and active membrane
properties [2].
The heterogeneity of TG neurons innervating the ocular surface
is also reflected in the variable expression of cellular markers for
molecules with a relevant role in sensory transduction and
signaling such as transient receptor potential (TRP) ion channels or
neuropeptides. The unique transcriptional programs of the
different classes of primary sensory neurons lead to differential
expression of specific ion channels underlying stimulus trans￾duction and encoding properties. These gene expression patterns
also determine the central distribution at higher-order neurons of
nerve terminals belonging to each sensory neuron lineage. In
recent years, great progress has been made in combining
transcriptome-based neuron typing performed with single-cell
RNA-sequencing, with the sensory phenotyping of DRG and TG
neurons according to size, stimulus modality, and expression of
neuropeptides, ion channels or protein receptors [32,33]. This al￾lows sensory neuron types to be classified into a larger number of
subtypes with distinct transcriptional profiles, molecular markers
and functional properties, some of which are associated with
pathological signs [34]. Such approaches have not yet been applied
to TG neurons innervating the ocular surface but would be expected
to greatly expand the limited knowledge of the relationship be￾tween ocular sensory neurons and their contribution to sensations
and autonomic responses in DED.
2.1.2. Sensory innervation of the cornea
2.1.2.1. Architecture of axons and terminals in the cornea. In animals,
approximately 20e30% of the axons supplying the cornea are thinly
myelinated (Ad) and the remainder are unmyelinated (C) [35,36].
However, myelinated fibers lose their myelin sheath within about a
millimeter of entering the corneal stroma [22,37]. Soon after
entering the cornea, the nerve bundles branch and anastomose
with neighboring bundles to form the stromal plexus concentrated
in the anterior one-third of the stroma [38]. The most superficial
layer of the stromal nerve plexus, located immediately below the
Bowman's layer, is known as the subepithelial plexus [38].
The majority of axons entering the corneal stroma penetrate
Bowman's layer from the subepithelial plexus and terminate as
unencapsulated nerve endings in the corneal epthelium [37].
However, a small population of axons terminates in the stroma [38],
while others form close anatomical relationships with stromal
keratocytes and macrophages [37,39]. The major innervation of the
corneal epithelium originates from 200 to 500 fine stromal nerve
bundles that penetrate Bowman's layer for the most part in the
peripheral and intermediate cornea [37,38]. In addition at its pe￾riphery, the epithelium receives inputs from nerves that enter
Fig. 1. Medial view of the orbit, showing the sensory and autonomic innervation of the
eye. The lacrimal gland has been removed for clarity. The ophthalmic branch (OB) of
the trigeminal ganglion (TG) gives the nasociliary nerve (NCN) that sends long (LCN)
and short (SCN) ciliary nerves to the eyeball. Frontal (FN) and lacrimal (LN) nerves
appear as cut in this picture. Sympathetic fibers from the superior cervical ganglion,
travelling in the carotid plexus (CPX) and parasympathetic branches of the ciliary (CG)
and the pterigopalatine ganglion join the short ciliary nerves. OMN: Oculomotor nerve.
MXN: Maxillary nerve. Modified from Netter, F, Atlas of Human Anatomy, 2nd Edition.
Icon Learning Systems, 1997.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 406
Fig. 2. Reconstruction of superficial nerve terminals in the mouse corneal epithelium showing examples of simple (1, black), ramifying (2, red) and complex (3, blue) nerve ter￾minals and impulse activity recorded from the different functional types of corneal nerve terminals in response to their specific stimuli (Modified from Ivanusic et al., [48] Gallar
et al. [61] and Belmonte et al. [59,60]).
directly from the pericorneal plexus [38]. On entering the epithe￾lium, each stromal nerve bends at an acute angle and branches into
multiple nerve fascicles that form the subbasal nerve fibers at the
interface between Bowman's layer and the basal epithelial cells.
The composite nerve structure formed by the subbasal nerve fibers
arising from each stromal nerve is termed an epithelial leash
[40,41]. Individual subbasal nerve fibers run parallel to one another
and to the ocular surface, for up to 6e8 mm [38]. Human subbasal
nerve fibers contain as many as 40 axons [42] that lose their
Schwann cell envelope when they enter the epithelium [37].
Adjacent epithelial leashes anastomose with one another
extensively forming a dense, mesh-like subbasal nerve plexus. This
plexus constitutes the densest layer of the human corneal inner￾vation and is readily visualized by in vivo confocal microscopy
(IVCM) and quantified in terms of nerve density [43,44]. This
approach has allowed the effects of conditions such as DED, dia￾betes, keratoconus, herpetic infections, as well as normal aging on
corneal innervation to be assessed (see Section 6.3.2). When
viewed in its entirety, the subbasal nerve fibers in the human
subbasal nerve plexus form a whorl-like pattern or “vortex”
[38,43,45], whose center is located approximately 2e3 mm infer￾onasal to the corneal apex. Similar whorl-like patterns of subbasal
nerve fibers are present in other, but not all, mammalian corneas,
including mice and rats [46e48].
Each subbasal nerve fiber gives rise to numerous intra-epithelial
terminals that are distributed throughout all layers of the corneal
epithelium [38,40,48]. Some axons end with small boutons within
the basal epithelium. Those that terminate more superficially in the
epithelium arise perpendicularly from the subbasal nerves and
project up to within a few micrometers of the surface of the
epithelium, where their terminations can be described on the basis
of their branching pattern as simple, ramifying or complex (Fig. 2)
[48]. Simple terminals do not branch after leaving the subbasal
nerves and end with a single, bulbar swelling in, or just below, the
squamous cell layer of the epithelium. Ramifying terminals branch
within, or just below, the squamous cell layer of the epithelium into
a number (usually 3e4) of horizontal fibers that run parallel to the
surface for up to 100 mm. Each branch ends in a single bulbar
swelling similar to those of simple terminals. The axons forming
complex terminals start to branch within the wing cell layer of the
cornea and form a cluster of highly branched fibers that have
endings in both the wing and squamous cell layers. Each of the
many branches in complex terminals has multiple bulbar endings
that are often larger than those associated with the simple and
ramifying terminals.
Epithelial nerve terminal arborizations are not static structures
and undergo continuous structural remodeling [49]. This normally
occurs in the healthy cornea due to the continuous shedding of
corneal epithelium cells, a process that results in full renewal in a
matter of days. When stromal and/or epithelial nerve branches are
damaged by trauma or disease there is also regrowth of axons to
repopulate the denervated tissues [50]. Corneal surgery (cataract,
photorefractive correction, glaucoma) is unavoidably accompanied
by nerve damage followed by a variable degree of regeneration,
depending on the location and extent of the injury [51]. Nerve
damage often accompanies metabolic diseases like diabetes and
viral, parasitic or bacterial infections [52e54].
2.1.2.2. Molecular and functional characteristics of corneal sensory
innervation. Electrophysiological recordings of single sensory
nerve fibers innervating the cornea have revealed the existence of
different functional types of ocular sensory neurons. These can be
broadly classified as polymodal nociceptor neurons, cold thermo￾receptor neurons and selective mechano-nociceptor neurons
[55e57]. There is now significant evidence, at least in animals,
supporting the notion that these three broad classes can be iden￾tified on the basis of their molecular phenotype and morphology
[36,48,58]. Molecular heterogeneity has been described both at the
level of the nerve terminals in the corneal epithelium and also in
the soma of corneal sensory neurons in the TG.
2.1.2.2.1. Polymodal nociceptors. The majority of the sensory
nerve fibers innervating the cornea are polymodal nociceptors.
They are activated over a wide range of stimulus intensities that
include near-noxious or noxious mechanical energy, heat, and
chemical irritants. They are also sensitive to endogenous chemical
mediators released by damaged corneal tissue and by resident and
migrating inflammatory cells, or those leaking from limbal blood
vessels [59e62]. Polymodal nociceptors have a mechanical
threshold slightly lower than pure mechano-nociceptors (described
below) and produce a sustained discharge in response to main￾tained mechanical indentation of the cornea [55]. When stimulated
with heat, they begin to fire at temperatures higher than 37  C [61].
Acidic solutions of pH 5.0e6.5 or gas jets containing CO2 (which
forms carbonic acid at the corneal surface) also activate corneal
polymodal nociceptors [59e61,63,64], as do other chemical agents
known to excite polymodal nociceptors in other tissues (eg pros￾taglandins, bradykinin, capsaicin) [60e62,65e67] (Fig. 2). Corneal
polymodal nociceptors can be sensitized by repeated noxious heat
stimuli and by inflammatory mediators [59e61], and this has been
demonstrated to occur in animals with allergic keratoconjunctivitis
[68]. In psychophysical studies, activation of corneal polymodal
receptors with an acidic stimulus (0e80% CO2 in air) evokes
stinging and burning pain sensations [64,66].
The TRP cation channel subfamily V member 1 (TRPV1) is
important for sensory transduction in polymodal nociceptors and
has been used extensively as a molecular marker for this cell class.
It is activated by capsaicin, low pH (pH 6), noxious heat (>42  C)
[69e71] and hyperosmlarity [72]. TRPV1 knockout mice display
altered responses to these stimuli and reduced thermal hypersen￾sitivity in the context of inflammation [69]. Capsaicin activates
polymodal nociceptors in the cornea [60,65,73] and upon applica￾tion to the human eye produces pain [74,75]. TRPV1 activation by
heat, protons and inflammatory mediators enhances excitability of
polymodal nociceptors [76].
In rat and guinea pig TGs, substantial proportions (25e45%) of
corneal afferent neurons express TRPV1 [58,77,78]. TRPV1-
expressing corneal afferent neurons do not express Piezo2 (a pu￾tative marker for low-threshold mechanoreceptors [36], see below)
and only ~6% co-express TRP cation channel subfamily M member 8
(TRPM8) channels (a putative marker for cold thermoreceptor
neurons, see below) [58]. It is possible that the population of
neurons that co-express TRPV1 and TRPM8 represent a subpopu￾lation of cold thermoreceptor neurons that display a paradoxical
response to noxious heating [79]. TRPV1 is also expressed in intra￾epithelial nerve terminal endings in the corneal epithelium
[58,77,78]. It should be noted that TRPV1 expression is not
restricted to neural elements in the eye, but is also found in sup￾porting cells throughout the different layers of the cornea [80]. It is
not known if activation of TRPV1 in support cells contributes to
corneal nerve activation.
Other transducer channels appear also to contribute to chemical
sensitivity of corneal polymodal nociceptors. In a fraction of them,
sensitivity to acidic stimulation remains after complete blockade of
capsaicin-induced activation of TRPV1 channels with capsazepine
[65,68]. This may be explained by the expression of acid-sensing
ion channels (ASICs) as responses of corneal polymodal noci￾ceptors to pH 6.6 solutions are abolished by ASIC blockers [27]. TRP
cation channel subfamily A member 1 (TRPA1) is an extremely
broadly tuned chemo-nocisensor channel [81,82]. TRPA1 is
expressed in the TG and ocular instillation of a selective TRPA1
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 408
agonist produces neuronal activation of trigeminal brainstem
neurons that is enhanced in an animal model for DED [83]. The
contribution of TRPA1 activation to the enhanced excitability of
polymodal nociceptors produced by inflammatory mediators
seems to be more modest than for TRPV1 [68].
There is evidence that multiple subpopulations of corneal
polymodal nociceptors exist with different molecular phenotypes,
nerve terminal morphologies and epithelial distribution within the
cornea. In guinea pig corneal epithelium, TRPV1-expressing nerve
terminals can be divided into 3 populations [58]. One population
displays terminals with ramifying morphology in the squamous cell
layer. These terminals do not contain calcitonin gene-related pep￾tide (CGRP), but they do express the glial cell line-derived neuro￾trophic factor family receptor alpha3 (GFRa3). The other two
populations end with simple endings, one in the wing cell layers
and the other in the subbasal plexus. Those nerves terminating in
wing cell layers express both CGRP and GFRa3, whereas those
terminating in the subbasal plexus express CGRP, but not GFRa3.
Importantly, the molecular phenotype of these neurons is main￾tained both at the level of the nerve terminals in the epithelium and
at their somas in the TG [58]. Whether this molecular heterogeneity
in corneal polymodal nociceptors is reflected in differences in
function has yet to be determined. The neuropeptides contained in
some polymodal receptors (substance P and CGRP) contribute to
the inflammatory response (‘neurogenic inflammation’) [84] and
promote corneal epithelial maintenance and physiological renewal
by activating cellular pathways that stimulate epithelial cell pro￾liferation, migration, adhesion and differentiation [85e88]. Thus,
peptidergic polymodal nociceptors are likely to have an important
role in maintaining corneal integrity. There is increasing evidence
that GFRa3 signaling is involved in sensitization of peripheral
sensory neurons and that the TRPV1 ion channel is involved in this
process [89e92].
2.1.2.2.2. Cold thermoreceptors. The cold thermoreceptors
represent 10e15% of the total population of corneal sensory neu￾rons. At stable temperatures close to that of the ocular surface
(34e35  C), most corneal cold thermoreceptors fibres continuously
generate action potentials and their activity is increased and
decreased by moderate cooling and heating, respectively.
[60,61,93e95], thus ressembling the canonical cold thermorecep￾tors reported in other body tissues. This population of cold ther￾moreceptors has been named high background, low threshold (HB￾LT) corneal cold thermoreceptors [96]. HB-LT cold thermoreceptors
change their activity at different static temperatures and are much
more strongly modulated by dynamic changes in temperature
[28,61]. With both cooling and heating, the magnitude of the
change in action potential generation in HB-LT cold thermorecep￾tors is strongly dependent on the rate of change of temperature
[94,95]. HB-LT cold thermoreceptors detect and encode very pre￾cisely the intensity of a temperature variation by their impulse
frequency, responding to temperature drops of 0.5  C or less
[61,96e98], explaining the perception of cooling produced by
1e2  C reductions in temperature at the corneal surface [99].
(Fig. 2).
In addition to sensing changes in temperature, the HB-LT
corneal cold thermoreceptors detect mild to moderate changes in
osmolarity [61,67,97,100,101]. At constant temperature, increases in
osmolarity accelerate action potential generation in these re￾ceptors. In mouse cornea, there was a significant increase in activity
of cold thermoreceptors when osmolarity was raised from 310
mOsm/L (control) to values greater than 340 mOsm/L [67]. This
modulation of nerve activity is observed when the solutions are
made hyperosmotic by the addition of NaCl [67,97,102,103] or by
the addition of mannitol or sucrose [97,101,103,104]. Thus it is the
change in osmolarity rather than the change in ionic composition of
the solution that modulates nerve activity, although an additional
direct surface charge effect produced by a high sodium ion con￾centration cannot be excluded. The activity of HB-LT cold thermo￾receptors is also inhibited by hypo-osmotic solutions [101]. This
finding suggests that under basal conditions tear film osmolarity
provides a stimulus to the cold thermoreceptors that contributes to
maintaining their ongoing nerve activity [67,105].
TRPM8 is a cation channel that is activated by cooling and
menthol and is important for cold sensation [98,106,107], including
cold pain [108]. A recent report demonstrates that TRPM8 channels
are also activated by increases in osmolarity from about 200
mOsmol/l [101]. Indeed the sensitivity of cells heterologously
expressing TRPM8 to changes in osmolarity is very similar to that of
corneal cold thermoreceptors in mouse cornea [101]. In TRPM8
knockout mice, nerve endings with high levels of ongoing nerve
activity characteristic of HB-LT cold thermoreceptors were not
detected in the cornea [98]. Furthermore, in wild-type mice,
blockade of TRPM8 with BCTC (N-(4-tertiarybutylphenyl)-4-(3-
chloropyridin-2-yl) tetrahydropyrazine-1(2H)-carbox-amide e a
TRPM8 antagonist) markedly reduced or silenced the ongoing ac￾tivity of HB-LT cold thermoreceptors and inhibited their response to
cooling [98]. Together these findings indicate that TRPM8 channels
transduce both cold and osmotic stimuli in corneal HB-LT cold
thermoreceptors and generate a background depolarizing current
that drives their ongoing nerve activity. This subpopulation of cold
thermoreceptors further exhibits a prominent expression of
hyperpolarization-activated cyclic-nucleotide-modulated (HCN)
channels, which modulates the depolarizing current thereby
contributing to tune the regular spiking exhibited by HB-LT cold
thermoreceptors [109].
Whilst most (around 70%) of corneal cold thermoreceptors
belong to the HB-LT type, there is a subpopulation (30%) of cold
sensitive corneal nerve fibers with very low ongoing activity at
basal temperature, higher thermal threshold (requiring tempera￾ture drops >4  C for activation) and weaker response to cooling
[104,110] named low background, high threshold (LB-HT) cold
thermoreceptors [110] (Fig. 2).
In the TG, approximately 10e20% of corneal afferent neurons
express TRPM8 [36,48,58]. Isolated trigeminal neurons with the
phenotype of cold thermoreceptors exhibit a wide range of thermal
and menthol thresholds [111]. The differences in threshold of cold
thermoreceptor neurons and peripheral terminals have been
attributed to variable expression of TRPM8 and of cold-sensitive
slowly inactivating Kþ channels whose activity opposes cold￾induced depolarization [111,112].
Morphologically, TRPM8-expressing nerve terminals in the
corneal epithelium are almost exclusively of the complex type and
have axon endings in both the wing and squamous cell layers of the
epithelium [48]. A similar complex morphology has been demon￾strated for nerve terminals expressing green fluorescent protein in
the corneal epithelium of TRPM8 reporter mice [98], reinforcing the
idea that endings with this morphology are associated with cold
thermoreceptor neurons.
2.1.2.2.3. Mechano-nociceptors. In electrophysiological studies,
about 20e30% of the peripheral axons innervating the cornea are
selective mechano-nociceptors that respond only to mechanical
forces at an order of magnitude close to that required to damage
corneal epithelial cells [60,62]. The receptors of this class have
conduction velocities in the Ad-fiber range and fire one or a few
nerve impulses in response to brief or sustained indentations of the
corneal surface, and often when the stimulus is removed [60,62].
Thus, the mechano-nociceptors are phasic sensory receptors that
signal the presence of the stimulus and, to a very limited degree, its
intensity and duration (Fig. 2). The threshold force required to
activate corneal mechano-nociceptors is relatively low (about
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 409
0.6 mN) in comparison with the force that activates mechano￾nociceptor fibers in the skin, but is higher than the threshold
force required for activation of corneal polymodal nociceptors [55].
The corneal mechano-nociceptors are probably responsible for the
immediate, sharp sensation of pain produced by touching or
scratching the corneal surface. Acute sensitization of corneal
mechano-nociceptors when repeatedly stimulated is not obvious,
although there is experimental evidence of a transient reduction of
their mechanical threshold during allergic keratoconjunctivitis
[68].
Recently, expression of a newly identified mechanically sensi￾tive ion channel, Piezo2, has been demonstrated in some DRG and
TG sensory neurons [36,113e115]. To date, Piezo2 expression has
not been demonstrated in intra-epithelial nerve terminals in the
cornea. However, Piezo2 expression assessed with in situ hybridi￾zation is present in approximately 30% of corneal sensory neurons
in the TG [36,58]. Piezo2-expressing corneal sensory neurons do
not express TRPV1, CGRP and/or TRPM8 and are thus unlikely to be
corneal polymodal nociceptors or cold thermoreceptor neurons
[36,58]. They are medium to large size neurons and express NF200
(a marker for myelinated neurons), which is consistent with their
classification as being thinly myelinated Ad fiber neurons. Thus
Piezo2 appears to be a marker for the corneal mechano-nociceptor
neurons.
Approximately 80% of corneal afferent neurons in the TG ex￾press TRPV1, TRPM8 or Piezo2 as seen by immuno-labelling and/or
in situ hybridization [58]. There is functional evidence that TRA1
channels are also expressed by some TRPV1 expressing corneal
polymodal nociceptor nerve fibers [110,116], but immunocyto￾chemical identification in TG corneal neurons or nerve terminals is
still lacking. The identity of the remaining 20% of corneal afferent
neurons remains to be determined. It is possible that some mem￾bers of the three functional subpopulations of corneal afferent
neurons do not express their respective molecular marker under
normal conditions, but switch on de novo expression in patholog￾ical conditions (such as inflammation). This would be consistent
with the classification of so-called ‘silent nociceptors’, which under
normal conditions are not activated by any stimuli at all, but after
inflammation, become sensitive to one or more stimulus types
[117]. Alternatively, it is possible that unlabeled neurons represent
another as yet undefined subpopulation of corneal afferent neu￾rons, or even polymodal nociceptors that do not express TRPV1.
2.1.2.3. Correspondence between functional properties of somata and
terminals. The correspondence between the different functional
characteristics of corneal nerve terminals and the electrophysio￾logical properties of their cell bodies in the TG are still incompletely
understood. A majority of Ad-fiber neurons and virtually all C-fiber
neurons supplying the cornea have long action potentials with an
inflexion (hump) on their falling phase [29,30] and display partial
or complete resistance to the voltage-gated Naþ (NaV) channel
blocker tetrodotoxin (TTX), reflecting the expression of TTX￾resistant NaV channels typical of corneal nociceptor neurons
[118]. Additionally, neurons with these properties are depolarized
by capsaicin, low pH, heat and mechanical stimuli, thus likely
correspond to the polymodal nociceptor type (see Section 2.1.2.2.1).
Another, distinct group of neurons exhibit a fast action potential
without a hump, that is blocked by TTX, and respond phasically to
mechanical stimulation, thus are likely mechano-nociceptors (see
Section 2.1.2.2.3). Finally, a smaller number of neurons show a
relatively fast action potential with either no or a very small
shoulder on the falling phase, high input resistance and a tonic
response to depolarizing pulses. They are depolarized by cold and
menthol and are presumably cold thermoreceptor neurons
[29,31,112] (see Section 2.1.2.2.2).
2.1.3. Sensory innervation of the conjunctiva and eyelid margin
2.1.3.1. Morphology of sensory axons and terminals of the conjunctiva
and eyelid margin. Much less is known about the sensory inner￾vation of the conjunctiva and eyelid margin than of the cornea.
Conjunctival sensory neurons have small diameter myelinated and
unmyelinated axons with peripheral endings that are mostly
unencapsulated (free endings) and often contain CGRP and/or
substance P (markers of peptidergic sensory neurons)
[23,119e125]. In the conjunctiva, the peptidergic free nerve endings
are located mostly around blood vessels in the stroma, but can also
be found to a lesser degree in the epithelium or around the acini of
meibomian glands and lymph follicles [15,121e123,125]. The
presence of non-peptidergic sensory neurons innervating the
conjunctiva has not yet been described. There is a single report of
complex corpuscular endings associated with myelinated axons in
the conjunctiva [126]. They are mostly located around the limbal
conjunctiva in humans and appear morphologically similar to
Krause endings.
In the eyelid margin, the morphology of sensory nerve terminals
is more diverse and includes abundant Meissner corpuscles, Merkel
disc endings and dermal and intra-epithelial free nerve endings
[120]. In addition, there are complex lanceolate, circular Ruffini,
Merkel and free nerve endings around the eyelashes [120]. Many of
these types of endings are specialized for the detection of very low
intensity mechanical stimuli, thus explaining why mechanical
threshold values in the lid border are similar or lower than in the
cornea [127]. The molecular phenotype of sensory neurons that
innervate the eyelid margin has not been examined.
2.1.3.2. Functional characteristics of the sensory innervation of the
conjunctiva. Only one study has directly investigated the response
characteristics of sensory nerves supplying the bulbar and palpe￾bral conjunctiva [128]. In recordings from axons in the nasociliary
nerves supplying the guinea pig conjunctiva, 53% were only acti￾vated by mechanical stimulation (mechano-sensory units), 41%
percent were activated by mechanical stimuli, heating and appli￾cation of irritant chemicals (polymodal units), and 5% were acti￾vated selectively by cooling (cold-sensitive units). So the response
characteristics of conjunctival sensory nerves appear to be similar
to those of the cornea. Indeed, in cats, the receptive fields of some
corneal Ad-fiber mechano-sensory and polymodal receptors extend
into the episcleral tissue that includes the limbus and surrounding
bulbar conjunctiva [60]. In the episcleral tissue of cats, there are
also cold thermoreceptors [61]. Consistent with these findings,
psychophysical studies in humans demonstrate that the conjunc￾tiva is sensitive to mechanical, acidic and cooling stimuli
[99,129,130].
Comparisons of corneal and conjunctival sensitivity to me￾chanical or acidic stimuli demonstrate that the conjunctiva is less
sensitive to both stimuli [129,130]. As yet we are not aware of any
reported differences between the response characteristics of sen￾sory neurons supplying the bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva. In the
human conjunctiva, application of low and moderate mechanical
stimuli generated minimal irritation, but their intensity could be
detected [99]. This finding is consistent with the conjunctiva con￾taining low threshold mechanoreceptors that generate innocuous
sensations. Stronger mechanical stimuli produced irritation and
pain, but their intensity was less than for the same stimuli applied
to the cornea [99]. Activation of conjunctival polymodal receptors
with acidic stimulation evoked only irritation and pain [99]. In
conjunctiva, unlike cornea, cooling stimuli produced purely cold
sensations [99].
No electrophysiological studies have reported the characteris￾tics of sensory neurons supplying the eyelid margins.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 410
2.1.4. Contribution of ocular sensory neurons to sensing eye
wetness
The eye surface of terrestrial animals, including humans, is
exposed to continuous oscillations in environmental humidity and
temperature that may reach extreme values [131]. Under
comfortable ambient conditions these changes remain unnoticed,
yet they can still cause subtle changes to the tear film and the
outermost corneal and conjunctival epithelium cells [132], and are
potential stimuli for ocular surface nerve endings.
2.1.4.1. Cold thermoreceptors. Considerable evidence suggests an
involvement of the two classes of cold thermoreceptors (HB-LT and
LB-HT), both in regulating tear formation to maintain the adequate
moistness of the ocular surface and in generating the sense of
irritation produced acutely by excessive drying of the ocular surface
[133]. The ability of cornea HB-LT cold thermoreceptors to detect
relatively small changes in both temperature and osmolarity makes
it likely that their primary role is to detect changes in the tear film
produced by evaporation - the primary contributor to tear film
thinning [134]. In humans, during a blink, the temperature at the
surface of the cornea rises by 0.5e1.0  C in less than a second and
then the temperature declines at ~0.05  C/s between blinks due
primarily to evaporative cooling of the tears [135e138]. In guinea
pig cornea, the activity of HB-LT cold thermoreceptors is reduced by
about 50% when the temperature of the cornea is increased by 1  C
at a rate of ~0.2  C/s [95]. During a blink, the rise in temperature at
the surface of the cornea is much faster and it can be predicted that
this would strongly inhibit the ongoing activity of cold thermore￾ceptors. During cycles of heating and cooling, the activity of cold
thermoreceptors increases very rapidly when cooling starts [95]. In
addition, the increase in tear film osmolarity produced by evapo￾ration will increase the activity of cold thermoreceptors [67].
Therefore it can be predicted that the activity of HB-LT cold ther￾moreceptors will be strongly modulated by cyclical changes in the
tear film produced by blinking.
In accord with their role in sensing changes in tear film, corneal
HB-LT cold thermoreceptors are strongly activated by a drying
stimulus that would both cool the ocular surface and increase tear
film osmolarity [79,97,104,133], consistent with the hypothesis that
cold thermoreceptors contribute to the reflex control of blinking
and basal tear production [139]. In support of this hypothesis, both
blinking and the basal level of tear production are reduced in
TRPM8 knockout mice compared to wild type animals [98,101],
while low concentrations of the TRPM8 agonist menthol increase
tear production in wild type mice, but have no effect in TRPM8
knockout mice [140]. Menthol also stimulates tear production in
guinea pigs [28]. Importantly, in these animal studies, the con￾centrations of menthol that stimulated tear production did not
induce nocifensive behaviors (eye swiping and lid closure) that are
associated with noxious chemical stimuli known to activate poly￾modal receptors. In humans studied at elevated ambient temper￾atures (~43  C), a stimulus known to inhibit the activity of cold
thermoreceptors in animals, reduced basal tear formation [98].
Together these findings support a role for corneal HB-LT cold
thermoreceptors in providing information about the dryness level
of the eye surface and in the reflex regulation of basal blinking and
tear production. The possibility that dysfunction of corneal cold
thermoreception contributes to the etiology of DED has been sug￾gested [28,98,139], but remains to be demonstrated.
Selective activation of cold thermoreceptors also evokes
conscious sensations in humans. In psychophysical experiments,
cooling the corneal surface by 1e2  C elicits a sense of cooling,
whereas cooling the corneal surface by 4e5  C elicits a sense of
irritation [64,99]. Similarly, humans exposed to menthol vapor that
increased its concentration in tears to ~5 mM reported a sense of
cooling, while those exposed to a higher level of menthol vapor that
increased the concentration to ~40 mM reported irritation [28].
When tested in guinea pigs, concentrations of menthol up to
200 mM increased the activity of cold thermoreceptors, but did not
activate polymodal receptors [28]. The finding that weak stimula￾tion of cold thermoreceptors causes a sense of cooling while a
stronger stimulation elicits a sense of irritation can potentially be
explained by the recruitment of cold thermoreceptors with higher
thermal thresholds (LB-HT cold thermoreceptors; see Section
2.1.2.4). This evidence suggests that the expected strong activation
of cold thermoreceptors during excessive drying of the eye surface
elicits the sense of irritation [139].
2.1.4.2. Polymodal and mechano-nociceptors. In intact eyes of
anesthetized animals [60,61], spontaneous nerve impulse activity is
absent or of very low frequency in conjunctival and corneal
mechano-nociceptors and polymodal neurons, indicating that
these cell types do not signal under resting conditions. Corneal
polymodal receptors are insensitive to innocuous cooling, although
they are activated by hyperosmotic solutions [61,67]. However, in
comparison with cold thermoreceptors, the sensitivity of poly￾modal neurons to increases in osmolarity is much lower, with an
activation threshold around 600 mOsm/L [67]. Therefore, they are
unlikely to be activated by this stimulus under normal conditions.
Mechanical stress of the corneal surface produced by tear film
breakup and dryness could potentially be detected by both the
polymodal receptors and mechano-nociceptors [141]. Also the
marked increases in tear film osmolarity that are suggested to occur
with tear film breakup [142] would be sufficient to activate poly￾modal receptors and thereby contribute to the ocular discomfort
that is experienced with an acute, excessive drying of the ocular
surface.
2.2. Interactions between primary sensory neurons and the
immune system
The nervous and immune systems have been traditionally
considered independent entities serving separate functions and
with limited cross-talk. In general, the inflammatory response
following tissue injury involves activation of mast cells and resident
sentinel immune cells such as dendritic cells (DC) in the cornea and
microglia in the CNS, as well as infiltration of the injury site by
circulating immune cells (neutrophils, lymphocytes and macro￾phages). Together these immune cells neutralize infective patho￾gens and contribute to tissue repair. In response to tissue injury, the
peripheral sensory neurons transduce and transmit information
about tissue damage to evoke sensations and reflex responses. In
addition, in the periphery, some sensory neurons release neuro￾peptides that interact with immune cells and other tissue elements
to contribute to the induction and spread of inflammation
(neurogenic inflammation) [57]. By contrast, recent evidence in￾dicates significant and complex interactions between the nervous
and immune systems that extend both to peripheral and central
nervous systems [143,144]. Neuro-immune crosstalk likely plays a
significant role in ocular homeostasis following tissue damage and
infection (see Section 5).
As a tissue in continuous contact with the outside world, the
cornea has evolved as an immune privileged site in order to
maintain transparency and preserve vision [145]. For that purpose,
the local immune system is actively controlled through complex
regulatory mechanisms to prevent inflammation, which is essential
to protect tissues from infectious agents, but can result in corneal
scarring and vision loss. Corneal immune privilege is based on
several pillars, including lack of blood and lymphatic vessels,
paucity of resident antigen presenting cells (APCs), low to minimal
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 411
expression levels of major histocompatibility complexes (MHC)
[146] and expression of neuropeptides and immunomodulatory
factors. Recent research has demonstrated that sensory innervation
contributes to maintaining the cornea's immune privilege by sup￾pressing adaptive immune responses, preventing blood- and
lymph-angiogenesis, and the expression of pro-inflammatory cy￾tokines, thereby maintaining immune tolerance [147]. In the
cornea, a close physical co-location of resident bone marrow (BM)-
derived cells with corneal nerves is well established
[39,144,147e151]. Resident corneal macrophages have been shown
to be in close contact with up to 10 separate axons in the subbasal
plexus in the central cornea, and enwrap nerve bundles in the
limbus and stroma [150].
Peptidergic polymodal nociceptor terminals of the cornea
contain the sensory neuropeptides substance P and CGRP [19] that
play a critical role in the induction of neurogenic inflammation
following tissue injury [56]. This occurs because the peripheral
axon terminals of the peptidergic nociceptors are highly branched
and action potentials arising in one nerve terminal branch propa￾gate both centrally to the brainstem and antidromically into all the
other nerve terminal branches, evoking the release of CGRP and
substance P (the so called ‘axon reflex’). These neuropeptides act
locally on pericorneal blood vessels and resident and infiltrating
immune cells, extending and amplifying the inflammatory reaction
induced by tissue injury [152]. Both CGRP and substance P also
contribute to the maintenance of corneal immune privilege; CGRP
has immunosuppressive effects while substance P acts as a potent
pro-inflammatory neuropeptide [153,154]. Mature and immature
DCs express CGRP type 1 receptors [155], with signaling through
these receptors decreasing HLA-DR (Human Leukocyte Antigen -
antigen D Related) and co-stimulatory marker molecule expression.
Thus, CGRP release inhibits antigen presentation [156] and de￾creases T cell proliferation in response to antigens [155]. Further￾more, CGRP has been shown to attract DCs towards peripheral
nerves, where higher concentrations result in arrest of their
movement [157]. Conversely, increased levels of substance P
disable regulatory T cells, which normally suppress the activity of
effector immune cells involved in immune responses [158]. These
observations suggest a role for sensory neuropeptides in the
maintenance of corneal immunoprivilege under normal circum￾stances. However, the roles of CGRP and substance P in the neuro￾immune cross-talk at the ocular surface in DED are yet to be
elucidated. Other neuropeptides (cholecystokinin, gastrin) have
been also detected in the cornea and TG neurons [159]. However,
their functional role remains enigmatic.
Fractalkine (FKN, also known as chemokine (C-X3-C motif)
ligand 1 (CX3CL1) is a structurally unique chemotactic cytokine of
the CX3C class and is produced by primary sensory neurons [160].
Unlike other non-selective cytokines, it binds only to its receptor
CX3CR1, which is expressed by sensory ganglion satellite glial cells
and leukocytes [161], and is a potent chemoattractant for immune
cells [162,163]. There is extensive evidence to support a role for
FKN/CX3CR1 signaling in the maintenance of homeostasis and that
its disruption results in the induction of inflammation [164]. In the
cornea, a role for FKN signaling in the recruitment of putative
macrophages and MHC class II expressing DCs to the corneal
epithelium has been demonstrated [165]. In addition, the dissoci￾ation of macrophages from nerves in the corneal stroma after injury
has been shown to be in part CX3CR1 dependent [39]. Interestingly,
while soluble FKN is not present in tears of healthy patients, it is up￾regulated in patients with DED [166].
Finally, the crosstalk between neurons and immune cells con￾tributes to the maintenance of peripheral nerve integrity and in-
fluences regeneration and degeneration processes. In humans, the
increased numbers of resident and infiltrating immune cells in the
cornea during infectious keratitis are highly correlated with
reduced numbers of subbasal nerves in the central cornea, sug￾gesting a causal relationship [148]. In contrast, activation of a T cell￾dependent inflammatory cascade, involving IL-17, neutrophils,
platelets and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A enhances
corneal nerve regeneration [167]. Also, the cytokine erythropoietin
(EPO) acting on the innate repair receptor (IRR) activates anti￾inflammatory and tissue repair pathways, favoring healing and
tissue repair, and regeneration of injured peripheral sensory nerves
[168].
Nerve growth factor (NGF) is essential for the development and
maintenance of peripheral sensory neurons. Several cell types
present in the cornea including epithelium, endothelium, kerato￾cytes, and nerves express NGF and/or the NGF receptors TrkA and
p75NTR. Likewise, NGF is also expressed by some of the various
subsets of BM-derived cells reported in the cornea [151,169,170].
Another group of molecular regulators that potentially mediate
crosstalk between the immune and nervous systems in the cornea
are the “immune semaphorins” (i.e., Sema3A, 4A, 4D, 6D, and 7A).
Unlike many conventional semaphorins that act as repulsive axon
guidance factors, “immune semaphorins” regulate immune cell
contacts and promote axon outgrowth [171,172]. For example,
Sema7A acts as a neurotrophic factor in the cornea that can also
influence inflammatory processes, while Sema3A is a negative
regulator of innervation that counterbalances the positive neuro￾modulatory function of VEGF [173]. A more complete identification
and functional characterization of the molecules that mediate
neuro-immune crosstalk is likely to aid in defining the cellular
processes that regulate the innervation of the ocular surface in
normal tissue and loss of innervation in chronic inflammation.
Experimental evidence suggests that satellite glial cells in the TG
release a variety of molecules that modulate TG neuron excitability
under normal circumstances and increase excitability when they
are persistently activated by noxious stimuli [174]. However, the
role that satellite glial cells play in modifying the excitability of TG
neurons that supply the ocular surface has not yet been investi￾gated. At spinal levels, persistent activity of DRG neurons activates
microglia in the dorsal horn that, in turn, modifies spinal neurons
that integrate noxious sensory information [5,175]. Activated
microglia release pro-inflammatory cytokines and other factors
that amplify synaptic transmission in the dorsal horn and thereby
induce central sensitization. The potential role of microglia acti￾vation in DED associated discomfort and pain is discussed in Sec￾tion 5.2.
In a healthy eye, bidirectional communication between nerves
and the immune system forms a negative feedback loop that keeps
both systems in check. Inflammation may disrupt neuro-immune
communication in DED, resulting in altered sensory nerve activity
and the unpleasant sensations associated with this condition (see
Section 5.1.1).
2.3. Central pathways and sensory processing
2.3.1. Trigeminal brain stem nuclear complex
TG neurons supplying the ocular surface and surrounding per￾iocular tissues send branches centrally to terminate at multiple
rostrocaudal levels of the trigeminal brain stem nuclear complex
(TBNC) [176e180]. The TBNC is composed of the principal trigem￾inal nucleus (Vp) in the pons and the spinal trigeminal nucleus in
the medulla that is further subdivided into subnucleus oralis (Vo),
interpolaris (Vi) and caudalis (Vc), based on anatomical and func￾tional properties. Second-order neurons that respond to ocular
surface stimuli are found at multiple levels of the TBNC, an orga￾nization that is unique to the trigeminal system and has no spinal
equivalent [181]. The majority of ocular surface-responsive TG
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 412
neurons terminate at two spatially discrete regions of the lower
TBNC: the transition region between caudal Vi and Vc (ViVc tran￾sition) and at the Vc/upper cervical cord junction (VcC1 region);
however, a smaller number of afferent fibers terminate in Vp and
Vo [179,180]. TG neurons that supply the eyelids [16,182], lacrimal
gland [183,184] and meibomian glands [177,185] display a similar
terminal pattern in the TBNC. The significance of eye representation
at multiple regions of the TBNC may reflect redundancy to preserve
eye function or alternatively, may reflect cell groupings that serve
different aspects of ocular function [186].
The role of CNS neurons in somatosensory function is predicted
using neurophysiological methods and is based largely on: i)
encoding properties to adequate stimuli, ii) effects of analgesic
drugs and iii) efferent fiber projection targets. Based on these lines
of inquiry, current evidence suggests that corneal neurons at the
ViVc transition and VcC1 region (i.e., “ocular neurons”) serve
different aspects of ocular function.
2.3.1.1. Ocular neurons at the ViVc transition. Ocular neurons
recorded at the ViVc transition encode the intensity of mechanical,
thermal and chemical stimulation of the ocular surface
[100,187,188]. Ocular neurons at the ViVc transition neurons are
excited by bright light [189] and are sensitive to changes in the
moisture status of the ocular surface, a feature not seen by neurons
in other TBNC regions [190]. The receptive field for most ViVc
transition neurons includes the entire ocular surface. Many ViVc
transition neurons also respond to innocuous and noxious stimu￾lation of periorbital skin; however, nearly 50% of neurons at this
region respond only to ocular surface stimulation [187,191]. Small
diameter myelinated (Ad) and unmyelinated (C) corneal nerve fi-
bers terminate at the ViVc transition. Repetitive ocular surface
stimulation often causes desensitization or fatigue of ViVc transi￾tion neurons, while systemic morphine administration enhances
corneal-evoked responses in about 30% of recorded neurons, a
feature that may contribute to opioid analgesia-induced ocular itch
[192]. Ocular neurons at the ViVc transition project to brain regions
that control lacrimation (superior salivatory nucleus) and eye blink
(facial motor nucleus) as well as to the sensory thalamus [193,194].
Blockade of synaptic activity at the ViVc transition prevents reflex
lacrimation due to bright light [195] and reduces eye blink behavior
evoked by hypertonic saline [196]. Collectively, these properties
suggest that ocular neurons at the ViVc transition play a significant
role in maintaining ocular homeostasis and a lesser role in sensory￾discriminative aspects of ocular pain.
2.3.1.2. Ocular neurons at the VcC1 region. Ocular neurons at the
VcC1 region encode the intensity of mechanical, thermal and
chemical stimulation of the ocular surface, and at similar thresh￾olds as ViVc transition neurons [187,188]. VcC1 neurons often
respond to multiple classes of chemical irritants [197,198]. How￾ever, there are significant differences in encoding properties for
ocular neurons at these two regions. Unlike neurons at the ViVc
transition, the receptive field for most VcC1 ocular neurons in￾cludes only a portion of the ocular surface and all neurons are
activated by noxious stimulation of periorbital skin [187,188]. Many
VcC1 neurons receive convergent input from the cornea and the
dura, suggesting a role in headache [199,200]. Repetitive ocular
surface stimulation sensitizes VcC1 neurons, while systemic
morphine administration inhibits corneal-evoked responses of all
VcC1 neurons in a dose-dependent manner [192]. Although VcC1
ocular neurons are also activated by bright light, synaptic blockade
of this region does not alter light-evoked lacrimation [189]. The
efferent projections of VcC1 ocular neurons include the facial motor
nucleus, pontine parabrachial nucleus, sensory thalamus and hy￾pothalamus [187,192,194,201] (Fig. 3). Synaptic blockade of the
VcC1 region causes a transient reduction in/of saline- or light￾evoked eye blink [196]. Collectively, current data suggest that
ocular neurons at the VcC1 region behave similarly to nociceptive
neurons found in dorsal horn of the spinal cord and likely are
critical for sensory-discriminative aspects of ocular pain.
There are scattered reports of neurons at Vp and Vo regions
responding to periocular stimulation [202e204]; however, their
contribution to ocular function is not known. Damage to the lateral
pons and medulla, as occurs in some stroke patients, can result in
paroxysmal or “salt and pepper” sensations in the eye consistent
with a role for the Vp/Vo region in ocular sensation [205].
2.3.1.3. TBNC intersubnuclear communication. Rostral and caudal
regions of the TBNC are connected through a dense longitudinal
fiber system [206e209]. Evidence that intersubnuclear pathways
serve a “feed forward” facilitatory function has been reported in
models for acute dental pain [210], headache [211] and evoked eye
blinks [212]; however, a role in DED has not been determined.
Intersubnuclear pathways also may contribute to opioid-induced
modulation of ocular pain since localized injections of opioid re￾ceptor agonists into the VcC1 region markedly alter corneal-evoked
responses of ocular neurons at the ViVc transition [194].
2.3.2. Representation of the eye at supraspinal brain levels
The representation of the ocular surface and periocular skin at
higher levels of the neuroaxis has not been well examined. Earlier
mapping studies identified neurons with periorbital receptive
fields in the most posterior and medial portions of the somato￾sensory thalamus [194,213], somatotopically appropriate for rep￾resentation of the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve
[214,215]. There are ocular neurons at the ViVc transition and
VcC1 region with projections to the parabrachial area and the
posterior thalamus, and not to the main sensory thalamic areas
[187,192,216]. Since these areas have strong connections with the
amygdala, insular cortex and other limbic brain areas, this suggests
a role in affective and/or autonomic aspects of pain [217,218].
Interestingly, stimulation of insular cortex evokes tingling and pain
sensations on the face and around the eye [219] whereas, in their
original mapping study in 1937 using electrical stimulation of pri￾mary somatosensory cortex, Penfield and Boldrey [220] could not
elicit ocular sensations. Neurons with a corneal or periorbital
receptive field have been recorded in primary somatosensory cor￾tex [221,222] and neuroimaging has identified an increase in signal
in primary somatosensory cortex after painful bright light stimu￾lation in humans [223]. These studies suggest that the eye is poorly
represented at thalamic and cortical areas closely associated with
sensory-discriminative aspects of pain, whereas strong connections
to brain regions associated with affective and autonomic aspects of
pain are found. A schematic representation of the ascending neural
pathways associated to the eye at different levels of the neuroaxis is
represented in Fig. 3 (see also Fig. 6).
3. Neural regulation of tear production
The components of the tear film are produced by the main and
accessory lacrimal glands, meibomian glands, goblet cells, stratified
squamous epithelial cells and corneal epithelium. The neural
regulation of secretion by each of these tissues is distinct.
The aqueous tear-producing tissues receive a parasympathetic
innervation that originates from the parasympathetic pter￾ygopalatine or ciliary ganglia and a sympathetic innervation that
originates from the superior cervical ganglia. In addition, most of
these tissues receive a peptidergic sensory innervation from TG
that potentially subserves an efferent function. In the sections
below, describing the innervation of specific glandular tissues,
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 413
immunohistochemistry was used to define the parasympathetic,
sympathetic and sensory nerve fibers. In most studies, immuno￾reactivity (IR) to the neuropeptide Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide
(VIP) was used to identify parasympathetic nerve fibers, but these
fibers were also localized by their IR for the enzyme acetylcholin￾esterase that inactivates released acetylcholine and the vesicular
acetylcholine transporter. Sympathetic nerve fibers were identified
by their IR for Neuropeptide Y (NPY), or for the enzymes Tyrosine
Hydroxylase (TH) or Dopamine b-Hydroxylase (DBH) that are
required for the synthesis of the sympathetic neurotransmitter
norepinephrine. Peptidergic sensory nerve fibers were identified by
their IR for the neuropeptides CGRP or Substance P.
3.1. Lacrimal gland
The lacrimal gland is the main producer of electrolytes, water,
and protein in the tear film. The lacrimal gland synthesizes and
secretes multiple proteins, many of which are anti-bacterial
[224e229]. These proteins are stored in secretory granules in the
acinar cells until released by the appropriate stimuli. Only a small
percentage of granules are released by exocytosis in response to a
given stimulus, a mechanism of secretion known as merocrine
[230]. Water and electrolytes are secreted by the coordinated
activation of ion channels and pumps [231e233]. Electrolytes and
water come from the blood supply and are transported across the
basolateral membranes into the lacrimal gland cells and then across
the apical membrane into the duct system. The ionic composition of
the fluid produced by the acini is modified within the ducts [234].
The ducts also secrete proteins that are different from those pro￾duced by acinar cells [235].
Autonomic nerves regulate the secretory activity of the lacrimal
gland. The activity of these efferent nerves is regulated by reflexes
initiated by activation of sensory neurons supplying the ocular
surface. As described in Section 2.1.4.1, recent evidence indicates
that corneal cold thermoreceptors sense changes in the dryness of
the ocular surface and elicit a reflex that contributes to the regu￾lation of basal aqueous tear formation. The overflow tearing initi￾ated by damaging or potentially damaging stimuli is elicited by
activation of mechano- and polymodal nociceptor sensory nerves
in the cornea and conjunctiva (Section 2.1.4.2).
While the lacrimal gland receives both a sympathetic and
parasympathetic innervation, the latter is most extensive. VIP-IR
nerve fibers (parasympathetic) are localized densely around the
basal surfaces of the acini with rare appearance around ducts and
blood vessels, and in the interstitial stroma and connective tissue
[236e241]. Acetylcholinesterase- and vesicular acetylcholine
transporter-IR nerve fibers are also localized around the ducts, acini
and blood vessels, and in the interstitial stroma and interlobular
tissue [239,242,243]. Thus the distribution of nerve fibers
expressing these proteins is similar to those containing VIP [239].
Exogenous application of muscarinic receptor agonists to the
lacrimal gland increases both protein and aqueous fluid (water and
electrolyte) secretion from the lacrimal gland [244e248]. In addi￾tion, there is consistent evidence that lesioning the pre- or post￾ganglionic parasympathetic nerves to the lacrimal gland causes a
marked reduction in lacrimal gland secretion [249,250]. A similar
reduction in lacrimal gland secretion is produced by in vivo
administration of muscarinic antagonists [251,252], demonstrating
the importance of neurally released acetylcholine in mediating the
actions of the parasympathetic nerves. Evidence indicates that
acetylcholine mediates its effects in the lacrimal gland by activating
M3 muscarinic receptors [253,254]. IR and gene expression for M3-
muscarinic receptors were demonstrated in lacrimal acinar,
myoepithelial and duct cells [255,256]. While these findings clearly
support a role of muscarinic receptors in stimulating lacrimal
secretion, prolonged application of the muscarinic agonist carba￾chol to lacrimal gland acinar cells in vitro results in a marked
reduction in protein secretion [257,258]. This reduction, which may
play a role in dysfunction of the lacrimal gland, is not accompanied
by changes in membrane expression of M3 muscarinic receptors
and has been attributed to down-regulation of post receptor￾signaling mediators and effectors [259]. In humans, the VIP re￾ceptor 1 was identified on the basolateral membrane of the acinar
cells, whereas the VIP receptor 2 was localized to the myoepithelial
cells. Application of VIP to isolated rabbit acinar cells or to the
isolated porcine lacrimal gland increases protein secretion
[237,260e263]. When both muscarinic and adrenergic receptors
were blocked, application of a VIP receptor antagonist produced a
small reduction in protein secretion evoked by electrical stimula￾tion of the nerves supplying the isolated porcine lacrimal gland
[261].
In general, the sympathetic innervation is located predomi￾nantly around the vasculature. Nerve fibers with IR for NPY (sym￾pathetic) are found around the arteries and arterioles and in the
interstitial stroma between lacrimal gland acini [239]. Similarly
nerve fibers with IR to TH or DBH are seen around the blood vessels
and in the interlobular connective tissue and in the stroma between
acini [239,241e243]. One study demonstrated more TH-IR nerve
fibers than NPY-IR nerve fibers [239], which may indicate that the
gland is innervated by more than one sub-population of post￾ganglionic sympathetic neurons as has been described in salivary
glands [264].
Sympathetic nerves can affect lacrimal gland secretion in two
different ways. First they can alter blood flow, with vasodilation
increasing electrolyte and water secretion, and with vasoconstric￾tion decreasing them [265]. Second, sympathetic neurotransmit￾ters can directly induce protein, electrolyte and water secretion
[243,261,266,267]. Exogenous application of a1- or b-adrenergic
receptor agonists increases lacrimal gland protein secretion
Fig. 3. Major ascending brain pathways for trigeminal sensory fibers that supply the
eye. The cell somata of sensory fibers are found within the trigeminal ganglion and
project centrally to terminate in two spatially discrete regions of the trigeminal
brainstem complex, the trigeminal subnucleus interpolaris/caudalis transition region
(ViVc) and the caudalis/upper cervical cord junction (VcC1). Second-order ocular
neurons in ViVc and VcC1 project to brain regions that mediate eyeblink (facial motor
nucleus, VII), lacrimation (superior salivatory nucleus, SSN), and cardiovascular re-
flexes (nucleus tractus solitarius, NTS). Projections to higher centers such as the peri￾aqueductal gray (PAG), PBA (PB), lateral hypothalamus (LH), posterior hypothalamus
(PH), and amygdala (Am) contribute to the affective and modulatory aspects of ocular
pain, while projections to the posterior thalamus (posterior nuclear group, Po; ventral
posteromedial nucleus, VPM) and insular cortex (Ins) mediate sensory-discriminative
aspects. Note that a small group of ocular responsive neurons also are found in the
contralateral ViVc; the source of input to this group is not well defined. Primary
afferent fibers are drawn in black, second-order projections in red and third-order
projections in blue. (Reproduced from Stapleton et al. [1]).
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 414
[268,269]. In rat lacrimal gland, the stimulatory action of a1-
adrenergic receptor agonists is mediated via a1D-adrenergic re￾ceptors [268]. Mouse lacrimal gland tissue showed IR for a1- and
b1-adrenergic receptors, with the acinar cells expressing both types
of receptor. Within the acinar cells, IR for a1-adrenergic receptors
was present both at the cell surface and in the cytoplasm, whereas
that for b1-adrenergic receptors was localized primarily to the
cytoplasm [269]. In addition, IR for a1-adrenergic receptors is
localized to the blood vessels and ducts in the mouse lacrimal gland
[269]. The actions of exogenously applied NPY have only been
investigated in porcine lacrimal gland where it also increases pro￾tein secretion [261]. Despite the findings that exogenous delivery of
sympathomimetics stimulates protein secretion, the physiological
role of the sympathetic innervation to the lacrimal gland has been
questioned because its function was not altered in rabbits when
innervation from the superior cervical ganglion was interrupted
[270].
ATP, which is potentially released from both parasympathetic
and sympathetic nerve terminals in lacrimal gland, can stimulate
protein secretion via activation of P2X3- and P2X7-purinoceptors
[271,272]. In addition, evidence suggests that there is a complex
synergistic interaction between muscarinic and P2X7 receptors in
stimulating protein secretion, and that activation of a1D-adrenergic
receptors triggers the release of ATP from the acini [273,274].
The lacrimal gland is also innervated by CGRP-IR fibers (pepi￾dergic, sensory) that are found predominantly around the lacrimal
ducts, but are also associated with the arteries and arterioles in the
lacrimal gland [236,239]. Substance P-IR nerve fibers have a similar
distribution to the CGRP-IR nerve fibers, but the numbers of CGRP￾IR fibers is higher [239]. Sensory denervation of the rabbit lacrimal
gland increases its protein secretion in response to exogenous
application of the b-adrenergic receptor agonist isoproternenol or
the muscarinic receptor agonist carbachol [270]. In addition, sen￾sory denervation results in a massive accumulation of vesicles
within the lacrimal gland acini. Together these findings suggest
that the sensory nerves play an efferent role in regulating lacrimal
gland secretion.
3.2. Accessory lacrimal glands
Like the main lacrimal gland, the accessory lacrimal glands
contribute electrolytes, water and protein to tears. Very little is
known about the neural control of accessory lacrimal glands, but it
appears to be similar to the main lacrimal gland [275]. Electron
microscopy studies have demonstrated the presence of non￾myelinated axons containing vesicles close to cells in the secre￾tory epithelium and intralobular ducts of the glands [276]. VIP-IR
nerve fibers (parasympathetic) have a similar distribution within
the accessory lacrimal glands [240]. Electron microscopy revealed a
few axons with small and large dense cored vesicles indicative of
sympathetic axons, but those with small clear vesicles and large
dense core vesicles indicative that parasympathetic axons were
much more prevalent [276]. Human accessory lacrimal glands ex￾press muscarinic receptors (M1 and M3), VIP receptors (1 and 2)
and adrenergic receptors (a1A, a2A, and b2) [275].
3.3. Meibomian gland
The meibomian gland produces meibum, which contains the
major lipid components of tears. These lipids are synthesized by the
meibocyte acinar cells and accumulate in these cells as they mature
and migrate toward the center of the acinus. Secretion occurs when
the cells rupture and release their contents into the lumen of the
duct system (holocrine secretion). There appear to be no studies
examining the role of nerves and their neurotransmitters in
regulating the holocrine secretion of the meibomian gland. Studies
have, however, noted the proximity of nerve fibers to the meibo￾mian glands in a wide range of animal species including humans
[125,185,240,277e283].
VIP-IR nerve fibers (parasympathetic) are present in the mei￾bomian glands [240,277,280,284] and are mostly associated with
the acini and central duct [123,183], but there is some debate sur￾rounding their association with the meibomian gland vasculature
[125,185,284,285]. Evidence exists to support the presence of VIP
receptors 1 and 2 and muscarinic receptors M1, M2, M3, M4, and
M5 within the meibomian gland acini, ducts, and basal epithelium
[286e288]. In immortalized human meibomian gland cells, appli￾cation of the muscarinic agonist carbachol or VIP increases cyto￾plasmic Ca2þ concentration and stimulates cell proliferation [288].
Application of VIP in combination with either 3-isobutyl-1-
methylxanthine or forskolin also causes a significant elevation in
intracellular cAMP content [288].
DBH- and NPY-IR (sympathetic) nerve fibers are predominantly
associated with the vasculature and are found more sparsely in the
meibomian gland acini [123,125,183,185,277,289]. Immunolabeling
has demonstrated that NPY receptor 1 is localized to the nuclear
membrane of the acinar cells and to the cell membrane of the
meibomian gland duct and acinar cells in mice [287].
CGRP-IR nerve fibers (peptidergic, sensory) were localized
mostly to the meibomian gland vasculature, but are also associated
with the ducts where their density is highest close to the orifice
[121,123,125,183,185,277]. Substance P-IR nerve fibers have a very
sparse presence in the meibomian glands, but they are also asso￾ciated with the acini, ducts and vasculature
[122,123,125,185,277,285]. The Substance P receptor (neurokinin 1
receptor) was also localized to the cell membrane of duct and acini
cells in the mouse meibomian gland [287].
3.4. Conjunctival goblet cells
Conjunctival goblet cells secrete the gel forming mucin
MUC5AC, electrolytes and water [290e292]. The secretory proteins
including mucins are synthesized in the goblet cells and stored in
secretory granules. Upon an appropriate stimulus, the secretory
granules fuse with each other and with the apical membrane to
simultaneously release most of the secretory granules in a given
cell (apocrine secretion). Activation of sensory nerves supplying the
rat cornea evokes goblet cell mucous secretion that is dependent on
activation of nerves within the conjunctiva [293]. However the
efferent nerve type(s) involved in mediating this reflex response
remains to be established.
Not all goblet cell clusters appear to have nerve fibers near their
basal membranes [124]. Where present, parasympathetic nerve
fibers revealed by VIP-IR have been found at the epithelial-stroma
junction and around the basolateral aspect of goblet cells in a va￾riety of animals [124,240,294]. IR for M1, M2 and M3 muscarinic
receptors has been demonstrated in goblet cells from mice and
humans, whereas rats expressed only M2 and M3 muscarinic re￾ceptors [294,295]. These receptors, as well as the VIP receptor 2, are
located subjacent to the secretory granules within the goblet cells.
Exogenous application of either VIP or the muscarinic receptor
agonist carbachol stimulates goblet cell secretion, indicating the
importance of the parasympathetic innervation [295,296].
DBH- and TH-IR (sympathetic) nerve fibers surround the goblet
cells [124,294]. Immunolabelling studies indicate that goblet cells
in humans express a1A- and b3-adrenergic receptors, whereas in
mice and rats b1- and b2- adrenergic receptors were demonstrated
[294]. Conclusions regarding b1- and b2-adrenergic receptor
expression in human goblet cells cannot be made, because suitable
antibodies are currently not available. In rats, CGRP-IR nerve fibers
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 415
(peptidergic sensory) are present in the conjunctiva, but were not
found close to the goblet cells [124].
As described for the lacrimal gland, ATP is another potential
signaling molecule that can be released from both parasympathetic
and sympathetic nerve terminals, and by other cell types. This
purine elicits mucin secretion from goblet cells in rabbit and human
conjunctiva via activation of P2Y2 purinoceptors [297].
3.5. Conjunctival stratified squamous cells
Conjunctival stratified squamous cells produce the membrane￾spanning mucins MUC1, MUC4, and MUC16 [298e300]. These
cells also secrete electrolytes and water into the tear film [290]. The
mucins are synthesized within the squamous cells and are then
inserted into the apical membrane where the extracellular domain
forms the glycocalyx that reaches into the tear film. The extracel￾lular domains of MUC1, MUC4 and MUC16 can be released into the
tear film by ectodomain shedding [301]. MUC4 can also be routed
via an intracellular pathway where it is secreted as a small soluble
mucin into the tear film [302]. Several non-neural processes
regulate the release of mucins from stratified squamous cells, but to
date no regulatory role for nerves or neurotransmitters has been
identified.
In mice, VIP-IR (parasympathetic) nerve fibers are located at the
basal surface of the stratified conjunctival squamous epithelial
cells, whereas TH-IR (sympathetic) nerve fibers are located at the
base of the epithelium [294]. By contrast, in humans, VIP-IR nerve
fibers are located at the base of the epithelium and TH-IR nerve
fibers are located at the basal surface of the squamous epithelial
cells [294]. IR for a1A- and b3-adrenergic receptors was detected in
squamous epithelial cells of human conjunctiva, whereas in mice IR
for a1A-, b1- and b2-adrenergic receptors were detected in these
cells [294]. In humans, M1, M2 and M3 muscarinic receptor sub￾types were detected in epithelial cells, with a high expression of M2
and M3 receptors in the basal epithelial cell layer of the conjunctiva
[294]. In mice and rats, M1 and M2 muscarinic receptors were
detected in squamous epithelial cells [294,295].
As indicated above, both goblet cells and stratified conjunctival
squamous epithelial cells secrete electrolyte and water into the
aqueous tear layer. To date this secretion has only been studied in
whole tissue segments of conjunctiva that contain both goblet cells
and stratified squamous epithelial cells. However, as there are
many more stratified squamous cells than goblet cells, it is likely
that these studies have primarily measured electrolyte and water
secretion from the squamous cells [290,303]. While there is no
direct evidence that nerves regulate conjunctival epithelial fluid
secretion, exogenous application of the a- and b-adrenergic re￾ceptor agonist, epinephrine, stimulates the electrolyte secretory
activity of the isolated rabbit conjunctiva [303,304]. This effect of
epinephrine was attributed to stimulation of b2-adrenergic re￾ceptors and the elevation of intracellular cAMP (cyclic adenosine
monophosphate) levels [304]. As it has a large surface area
compared to the cornea, the conjunctiva can supply the pre￾corneal, tear film.
3.6. Corneal epithelium
The corneal epithelium also secretes mucins, electrolytes and
water into the tear film, but its contribution is limited. The auto￾nomic nerve fibers innervating the corneal epithelium are pre￾dominantly sympathetic, but there is also a minor contribution of
parasympathetic nerve fibers [305]. As indicated in Section 2.1.2, a
significant proportion of polymodal nociceptor sensory nerve fibers
of the cornea are peptidergic and release neuropeptides when
activated by noxious stimuli [306]. Their influence on corneal
epithelium tear fluid secretion is unknown.
As with the conjunctiva, epinephrine stimulates the electrolyte
secretory activity of the corneal epithelium [307]. Furthermore,
surgical removal of the superior cervical ganglion reduces corneal
epithelial Cl- transport and increases sensitivity to epinephrine
[307]. These findings clearly indicate a functional role for sympa￾thetic nerves in regulation of corneal electrolyte secretion. As with
the conjunctiva, the stimulatory effect of epinephrine on corneal
electrolyte secretion is attributed to activation of b-adrenergic re￾ceptors and the elevation of intracellular cAMP levels [307].
4. Neural regulation of eye blinks
The neural pathways involved in reflex blinking are better known
than those for spontaneous blinks. The orbicularis oculi (OO) muscle
acts to close the upper eyelid during the blink. Ocular surface acti￾vation of the OO arises in its sensory nerves, which project to the
motor neurons of facial nerve (Cranial nerve VII) through trigeminal
sensory fibers [193,308]. There are at least two major circuits involved
in the downward phase of blinking that are associated with a stimulus
evoking reflex blinks. The short-latency (R1) response originates in
the caudalis subdivision of the TBNC and is pre-programmed to
produce increasing OO motoneuron activity with increasing stimulus
amplitude that is relatively insensitive to sensory feedback. The long￾latency circuit (R2) is slower and is sensitive to sensory feedback,
including sensory neurons from the ocular surface. Unlike the R1
response, the R2 response is not pre-programmed, but rather can
modify the blink to fit the stimulus [309,310].
The reflex blink pathway has three basic components in its
simplest form: (1) primary corneal afferents, (2) second order TBNC
neurons, and (3) OO motoneurons (Fig. 4). Anatomical studies in
rats show that the ViVc transition region and the VcC1 region
project to the facial motor nucleus [182,194] and that damage to the
caudal trigeminal brainstem complex severely impairs the gener￾ation of cornea-evoked reflex blinks in humans [311]. The discharge
pattern of ViVc neurons appears to initiate blinking, sets blink
amplitude and peak velocity of corneal reflex blinks, while neurons
at the VcC1 region modify the activity of ViVc transition neurons
and eye blinks [212,312]. (see Section 2.3.1).
The main downward force of the blink is generated by the
sphincter-like OO, but there is an additional passive downward
force generated by the spring-like qualities of the stretched ten￾dons associated with the levator palpebrae (LP) muscle. Thus, the
downward phase of the blink is very rapid and occurs immediately
following a burst of OO motoneuron activity, during which LP
motoneurons temporarily cease firing. For example, downward lid
saccades may reach a velocity of 294 per sec, while the down
phase of the blink can easily surpass that speed at 840 per sec. All
of the other extraorbital muscles transiently co-contract with the
blink, with the exception of the superior oblique, so that the eye is
drawn transiently upward during the blink [313].
The main upward force of the blink comes from the LP muscle,
with some input from Müller's muscle. Motoneurons of the facial
nerve innervate the OO and show little or no tonic activity.
Instead, these motoneurons are characterized by high frequency
bursts of activity with the down phase of the blink. In contrast, LP
motoneurons like most of the other extraocular muscles in the
orbit are innervated by the oculomotor nerve (Cranial Nerve III)
and exhibit tonic activity, which increases with upward gaze.
Thus, the open eye condition is maintained by tonic activity of the
LP, balanced by passive downward forces provided by the LP
aponeurosis, the LP tendon and palpebral ligaments [314]. The up
phase of the blink is slower than the downphase and is due to a
burst exceeding the tonic activity of the LP. Müller's muscle has a
slight additive effect on the up phase, opening the eye wider with
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 416
sympathetic nerve activation in, for example, a state of fear or
surprise. When sympathetic innervation is affected, as in Horner's
syndrome, lack of input from the Müller's muscle results in ptosis
of the eyelid [313].
The ocular surface input for spontaneous blinking is less well
understood than for reflex blinking. Many studies have shown
increased spontaneous blinking when the ocular surface is stim￾ulated [315e317]. Recently, Wu et al. showed a linear increase in
blink rate with increasing air flows applied on the ocular surface
[318]. This stimulus enhances cold thermoreceptor activity, thus
favoring the interpretation that spontaneous blinking is main￾tained, at least in part, by the continuous nerve impulse firing of
corneal cold thermoreceptors (see section 2.1.4.1) [139]. Indeed,
genetic silencing of cold thermoreceptors in mice or ocular
instillation of a local anesthetic in humans, reduces blink rate
[101,315,319]. Hence, these studies suggest that the afferent input
from ocular surface sensory nerves, in particular cold thermore￾ceptors, contribute to maintain the spontaneous blink rate
through modulation of the spontaneous blink generator. The as￾sociation of DED with increased blinking is presumably due to an
enhanced activity of ocular surface sensory nerve terminals
evoked by the irritation provided by an unstable tear film
[28,315,320e322]. Wearing contact lenses, which may stimulate
the ocular surface, is also associated with an increased blink rate
[323,324].
Central dopamine levels are also known to affect the sponta￾neous blink rate. For example, patients with schizophrenia exhibit a
higher blink rate, while those with Parkinson's Disease show a
lower blink rate, most likely due to differences in dopamine levels
in those conditions [325e327]. Cognitive state can also vary the
blink rate [328e330]. Reading, working on computers, or other
visual tasks requiring concentration are known to decrease blink
frequency [316,321,324,331,332]. Thus, it is clear that a number of
factors acting at various levels of the neuroaxis combine to affect
the spontaneous blink rate.
Recently, Kaminer et al. [333] hypothesized that a spontaneous
blink generator that acts to set the spontaneous blink rate was
located in the brain stem trigeminal complex. They found that both
rats and humans exhibited a periodicity in the blink rate over time,
with both species displaying a similar temporal organization in
spontaneous blink pattern. They were able to show modulation of
the blink rate in DED and by altering dopamine levels in the brain in
a rat model. These data suggest an essential role for the brain stem
trigeminal complex, already known to play a part in reflex blinking,
in determining the spontaneous blink pattern. Thus, spontaneous
blink patterns are likely to be modified by multiple neural sources
including corneal afferents, the secretion of dopamine by basal
ganglia and cortical input that can be altered by mood or task.
Blinks also can occur in clusters or flurries [321,334], where
relatively innocuous stimuli can evoke multiple blinks, termed
blink oscillations, instead of a single reflex blink [335]. Blink os￾cillations are also common in Parkinson's Disease [336], a condition
characterized by loss of dopamine neurons in basal ganglia. In ag￾ing, the blink oscillations may occur due to a normal, age-related
loss of dopamine neurons [335,337]. Blink ocillations also in￾crease in blepharospasm that may be driven, in part, by dry eye
symptoms and ocular surface irritation that enhance the activation
of Ad- and C-fiber sensory nerve inputs [337]. Peshori et al. hy￾pothesized that the purpose of these blink oscillations is to improve
the ocular surface tear film to compensate for increasing eye dry￾ness with age [335].
5. Neurobiological changes in dry eye disease
It is well established that the sensory nerves of the ocular
surface display structural and functional changes in DED and un￾derlie the development of adverse symptoms that range in in￾tensity from mild discomfort and dryness to burning pain. In
chronic DED, it is likely that multiple levels of the neuroaxis are
involved resulting in aggravation of adverse symptoms as well as
altered tissue trophism, regulation of tear production, blinking and
reflex vascular responses.
5.1. Effects of eye surface dryness on peripheral sensory neurons
Reduced tear secretion leaves the corneal epithelium exposed to
adverse environmental conditions. The osmolarity of the tear film
increases while excessive evaporation causes rapid cooling of the
ocular surface. Both of these events cause stress to the ocular
mucosal epithelium, leading ultimately to local inflammation and a
variable level of peripheral nerve damage (see TFOS DEWS II
Pathophysiology report [544]). In other tissues, it has been shown
that local inflammation and nerve injury evoke profound short￾and long-term genetic and molecular changes that modify the
electrophysiological characteristics of the peripheral terminals,
parent axons and cell bodies of the primary sensory neurons [338].
In the longer term, these changes lead to abnormal peripheral and
central nerve terminal sprouting, aberrant impulse activity and
alterations in the central synaptic transmission, resulting in dys￾regulated transmission and processing of pain signals leading to
chronic pain [338]. While the mechanisms that lead to the
abnormal sensations of discomfort and pain referred to the eye
with chronic tear deficiency have not been precisely identified, it is
likely that they involve similar mechanisms to those demonstrated
for other chronic pain conditions.
5.1.1. Local inflammation
Inflammation plays a key role in the pathogenesis and chronicity
of DED [339] and represents a major driving force in sensitization,
damage and regeneration of the peripheral sensory neurons
[338,340,341]. Persistent stress from desiccation stimulates the
local release of a variety of chemical mediators from epithelial cells,
keratocytes and resident or infiltrating immune cells (such as APCs,
neutrophils, monocytes, mast cells and platelets). In DED, the
lacrimal gland can also become inflamed and is another potential
source of chemical mediators that contributes to the inflammatory
Fig. 4. The corneal eye blink reflex is initiated by the free nerve endings in the cornea
and involves the trigeminal nerve and ganglion (TG), the brainstem nuclei (VcC1:
caudalis/upper cervical cord junction and ViVc: interpolaris/caudalis transition region),
interneurons in the reticular formation (RF), motor neurons in the facial nucleus (VII)
and nerve, and the orbicularis oculi. As the afferent information is distributed bilat￾erally to facial motor neurons by the reticular formation interneurons, the eye blink
response is consensual, that is, both eyelids will close to stimulation of the cornea of
either eye.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 417
environment at the ocular surface [342,343]. The chemical medi￾ators released include eicosanoids [prostaglandins (PGs), leukotri￾enes (LTs), thromboxanes (TXs)], bradykinin (BK), 5-
hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), histamine (HIS), purines [adenosine,
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)], hydrogen ions (Hþ), nitric oxide
(NO), platelet-activating factor (PAF), neurotrophins (eg. NGF,
GDNF), endocannabinoids, proteases as well as pro-inflammatory
cytokines such as interleukins (IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-17),
macrophage inflammatory protein-1a, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-
a and granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
[56,57,338,344e351]. Each of these chemical mediators potentially
contributes to increasing activation of sensory nerve terminals,
either by reducing their threshold for activation by sensory stimuli
(sensitization) and/or by directly inducing or increasing their
ongoing nerve activity.
The events triggered by proinflammatory agents are diverse and
complex [347,352]. Activation of G protein coupled receptors
(GPCR) located in the membrane of nociceptive terminals by the
inflammatory agents is one of the general mechanisms for modu￾lation of nociceptor's excitability employed by numerous proin-
flamamtory substances. Activated GPCRs couple to specific G
proteins that mediate the recruitment of one or multiple signaling
pathways (protein kinase C, phospholipase C (PLC), cAMPeprotein￾kinase-A, release of calcium from intracellular stores) [353,354].
Other chemical mediators, like growth factors, act on tyrosine ki￾nase receptors, which then activate a variety of intracellular
signaling pathways (PLC, phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)) [354]. The kinases acti￾vated by these signaling pathways in turn phosphorylate existing
protein targets in the nociceptors. These include ion channels that
contribute critically to the activation of sensory nerve endings by
stimuli, such as transduction channels that convert the sensory
stimulus into a membrane depolarization (receptor potential) and
voltage-gated, ligand-gated and background (or leak) ion channels
that regulate the resting membrane potential and action potential
firing properties. In general, phosphorylation increases the function
of protein targets such as TRPV1 [69] and leak (TREK) Kþ channels
[355] as well as NaV channels [356] by reducing their threshold for
activation and/or by affecting their activation kinetics.
Excitation and sensitization are the main consequences of the
interaction of proinflammatory mediators with their target mem￾brane receptor protein in nociceptors. However, there is also a
group of bioactive lipid mediators produced at sites of injury and
inflammation that antagonize the effects of pain promoting
(proalgesic) agents and modulate pain initiation. They include
endogenous cannabinoids, a family of arachidonic acid derivatives
of which anandamide and 2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycerol are best
known [357]. These endogenous analgesic agents are produced
during injury by hydrolysis of phospholipid precursors in cell
membranes and they activate CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors, a
class of Gi/o-coupled GPCR. These in turn inhibit both TRPV1
sensitization and the activation of voltage-gated Ca2þ channels and
ASICs [357], thus counteracting the inflammatory process to restore
homeostasis in damaged tissues.
Acute sensitization of nociceptor terminals is the short-term
consequence of the activation by proinflammatory agents of
intracellular signaling cascades, leading to augmented activity of
ion channels mediating transduction, and action potential firing.
However, altered gene expression is another major cellular process
that induces persistent nociceptor sensitization. It is initiated by the
electrical and molecular signals sent from the periphery to the cell
body as a result of sustained nociceptor stimulation [358]. As a
result, there ensues an upregulation of proteins (receptors and
signaling molecules, ion channels) that are transported back to
nerve terminals, wherein they mediate the increased
responsiveness to peripheral stimuli. Altered gene expression may
include either induction of novel genes and/or upregulated
expression of constitutively expressed genes. Typically, in noci￾ceptors this includes increased expression of TRPV1 channels and
various NaV channels [358]. Neurotrophins (eg NGF, GDNF) that are
generated by tissue injury/inflammation are key retrograde mes￾sengers that induce changes in gene expression [89,359,360].
Recently, changes in expression of transcription regulating micro
RNAs have been demonstrated in DRG and TG in response to pe￾ripheral inflammation, and it has been speculated that these
contribute to modulating the expression of pro-and/or anti-noci￾ceptive molecules in acute and chronic pain states [361,362].
Knowledge of the cellular and molecular inflammatory mecha￾nisms activated by ocular dryness and the effects on corneo￾conjunctival peripheral nociceptor terminals is incomplete
compared with other tissues like the skin. In experimental animals,
acute application of prostaglandin E2, bradykinin, or of a mixture of
proinflammatory agents that contains both these substances
together with 5-hydroxytryptamine, histamine and substance P
(‘inflammatory soup’), to the cornea produces enhanced sponta￾neous and stimulus-evoked nerve impulse activity in polymodal
nociceptors [59,363]. Likewise, corneal inflammation induced
experimentally by an ocular allergic challenge [68] or by exposure
of the eye surface to UV radiation [116], elicits spontaneous firing
and a reduction in mechanical threshold of corneal mechano￾nociceptor fibers, while spontaneous firing and sensitivity to
acidic stimulation is enhanced in polymodal nociceptors. This
sensitization of polymodal receptors appears to involve TRPV1
channels as it was reversed by blockade of these ion channels [68].
Hence, the available experimental evidence suggests that in DED
the interaction of mechano-nociceptors and polymodal nociceptors
with pro-inflammatory substances released during dryness-evoked
inflammation is likely to induce both an increase in ongoing nerve
activity and an enhanced sensitivity to sensory stimuli [139]. In
contrast, the activity of corneal cold thermoreceptors is reduced by
exposure to ‘inflammatory soup’, an effect mediated via activation
of Gq-coupled GPCR and a direct inhibitory action of the G-protein
subunit Gaq on TRPM8 channels [364].
5.1.2. Nerve injury
The high density and the superficial location of the sensory
nerve terminals between the epithelial cells at the surface of the
cornea, makes them particularly vulnerable to injury by adverse
environmental conditions (such as air pollution, low humidity),
trauma (cataract and refractive surgery) and disease (pterygium,
conjunctivochalasis, keratoconus) [365e367]. Also, in animals in
which aqueous tear secretion or composition is disturbed experi￾mentally, the density and architecture of subbasal nerve leashes
and epithelial nerve terminals are greatly altered [28,103]. Like￾wise, in humans, confocal microscopy of corneal nerves in patients
with aqueous tear deficiency of variable etiology reveals changes in
number, tortuosity, and branching pattern of subbasal plexus nerve
fibers [368e372]. It is reasonable to assume that when the tear film
covering the ocular surface is thinned, the mechanical stress
generated by blinking movements on superficial epithelial cells
becomes abnormally high, injuring terminal nerve branches. This
initiates a cycle of degeneration and regeneration leading to the
altered architecture of corneal and conjunctival nerve fibers.
It is well established that damage to the peripheral nerve end￾ings of nociceptive sensory neurons elicits profound changes in
their spontaneous and stimulus-evoked firing pattern [341]. As
with inflammation, these changes in nerve activity are the conse￾quence of alterations in the activation threshold and kinetics of the
transduction ion channels and voltage-gated ion channels in the
axonal membrane, and a change in the expression and trafficking of
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 418
these proteins. For example, altered expression of various trans￾duction channels (such as TRPV1, TRPA1, and TRPM8) has been
demonstrated in experimental models of nerve injury-induced
pain [373]. Also, the density and distribution of NaV (eg NaV1.3,
NaV1.6, and NaV1.9 channels) and voltage-gated calcium (CaV3)
channels that are involved in the generation and propagation of
action potentials can be markedly altered by nerve injury
[374e376]. Moreover, the expression of voltage-activated Kþ
channels (KCNQ, Kv3, Kv7), hyperpolarization-activated cyclic
nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels and leak (TREK) Kþ channels that
are involved in setting the resting membrane potential and in
regulating neuronal excitability can change markedly [6,376].
Together, these disturbances lead to increased responsiveness to
natural stimulation and to the initiation of spontaneous action
potentials at sites in the sensory neuron (in peripheral axon or
soma) that do not normally generate impulses (ectopic activity).
Altered ion channel expression in response to nerve injury also
extends to the centrally projecting presynaptic terminals of the
sensory neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. In this
location increased expression of voltage-activated Ca2þ channels, in
particularly the CaV3 channels that are responsible for the low￾voltage-activated ‘T’-type current, has been shown to contribute
to the generation of hyperalgesia [376].
It is worth noting that nerve damage also occurs in response to
continued exposure to inflammatory agents and, conversely, acute
nerve injury triggers an immediate local inflammatory reaction
with macrophage infiltration in the surroundings of the injured and
entrapped axons [341]. Therefore, the genetic, molecular and
functional consequences of inflammation and injury overlap to
produce increased activity of peripheral sensory nerve fibers and
the generation of unpleasant and painful sensations. Typically,
resolution of inflammation and repair of damaged axons would
result in the reversal of effects in early stages of DED. However,
sensory hypersensitivity can persist for prolonged periods of time,
even after the original cause of the changes (eg infection, surgery,
toxicity) has resolved and can worsen if damage to the nervous
elements persists through chronic inflammation [5]. Although
inflammation and changes to the innervation of the cornea indic￾ative of nerve damage have been demonstrated in DED, the exact
contribution of these changes to the generation of abnormal sen￾sations referred to the ocular surface remains to be resolved.
5.1.3. Dryness-induced disturbances in the activity of peripheral
ocular sensory fibers
The effects of a chronic deficiency in tear production on the
behavior of the different classes of corneal sensory receptors have
been studied in animals following lacrimal gland removal [28,100].
5.1.3.1. Cold thermoreceptors. In both rats and guinea pigs, pro￾longed reduction in tear production sensitizes HB-LT cold ther￾moreceptors, with both a shift in the cooling threshold to warmer
values and an increased peak frequency of nerve activity evoked
during cooling ramps [28,100]. In addition, in rats there is an
increased likelihood that the cold thermoreceptors will respond to
noxious heating than in sham-operated rats [377]. In guinea pigs,
there is a gradual increase in the level of ongoing nerve activity of
cold thermoreceptors and the sensitization of cold thermorecep￾tors induced by tear deficiency is associated with morphological
changes to the corneal innervation, suggestive of nerve damage
[28]. The hyperexcitability of cold thermoreceptors could partially
explain the characteristic unpleasant dryness sensations reported
by patients with DED (see Section 2.1.4.2).
Electrophysiological investigation of corneal cold-sensitive
neurons isolated from TGs of guinea pigs with deficient tears
demonstrated no changes in the cold-induced inward current [28].
This finding suggests that sensitization is not attributable to
increased expression of TRPM8 channels. Instead, there are in￾creases in NaV channel currents and decreases in Kþ channel cur￾rents in corneal cold thermoreceptive neurons; changes that would
increase neuron excitability by reducing the voltage threshold for
action potential initiation. The underlying mechanism(s) that pro￾duce these changes are unknown.
5.1.3.2. Polymodal and mechano-nociceptors. Mechanical sensi￾tivity of the cornea assessed behaviorally is increased by chronic
tear deficiency in rats [378], but whether this change involves
sensitization of polymodal receptors and/or mechano-nociceptors
to mechanical stimuli is unknown. The effects of chronic tear
deficiency on the activity of corneal polymodal receptors and
mechano-nociceptors have been investigated in guinea pigs [28]
and rats [377]. In guinea pigs, there was a transient increase in
the spontaneous activity of both polymodal receptors and me￾chano-nociceptors that returned to normal 4 weeks following
lacrimal gland removal. However, the mechanical threshold of both
the polymodal receptors and mechanonociceptors was not changed
by lacrimal gland removal. In contrast, the response of the poly￾modal receptors to acidic stimulation was increased, consistent
with a moderate degree of sensitization [28]. The possibility that
tear film deficiency sensitizes corneal polymodal receptors to
hyperosmotic stimuli has not been explored. However, acute
topical application of a combination of inflammatory mediators to
the cornea increased the ongoing activity of polymodal receptors,
but did not increase their sensitivity to hyperosmotic stimuli [67].
Electrophysiological investigation of retrogradely labelled capsa￾icin-sensitive corneal neurons (presumed polymodal receptors)
isolated from TG of guinea pigs with deficient tears, revealed in￾creases in NaV channel currents and decreases in some Kþ channel
currents [28]. These changes would increase the excitability of the
polymodal receptors and explain their moderate degree of
sensitization.
Fig. 5 summarizes the interactive influences of dryness and
inflammation on the activity of ocular surface sensory receptors on
sensation, blinking and tearing.
5.2. Central mechanisms of sensitization
The abnormal impulse activity generated by peripheral inflam￾mation and/or nerve injury represents by itself an altered sensory
message transmitted to higher relay stations in the CNS. It also has
additional consequences on the excitability, synaptic efficacy and
connection pattern of the presynaptic nerve terminals of sensory
neurons in the dorsal horn and brainstem, modifying transmission
of signals to second-order neurons.
Chronic pain and central sensitization often begin following an
initial insult to peripheral nerves and once established, are main￾tained by even low levels of peripheral nerve activity [5,379]. The
concept of an initial insult that sensitizes pain pathways in the
brain often is referred to as “hyperalgesic priming” and is well
established for other pain models [380e382], but is poorly defined
in animal models for DED. Although a wide variety of peripheral
factors associated with ocular surface disease are capable of acti￾vating corneal sensory nerves [133,139,383], it is not known which
factors or combinations of factors must be present and for how
long, to induce central sensitization and chronic ocular pain in DED.
Central sensitization of spinal cord neurons is maintained by
persistent activity in peripheral nerves together with changes in
their activation and modulation by local circuit neurons and
microglia, and altered descending controls from higher brain cen￾ters [5,175,379]. Nerve injury or inflammation enhances the release
of neurotransmitters, such as substance P and glutamate, from
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 419
primary afferent fibers that bind to neurokinin and N-methyl-D￾aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors on second-order neurons in
the spinal dorsal horn, resulting in an increase neuronal excitability
[338]. Sensitized spinal dorsal horn neurons project to higher brain
centers and are necessary to engage thalamocortical and limbic
pathways that underlie the discriminative and affective aspects of
pain [384]. Considerable evidence suggests that second-order
ocular neurons at the ViVc transition and VcC1 region behave, in
many respects, as spinal dorsal horn neurons and are critical for the
development of persistent ocular pain. In animal models for ante￾rior uveitis [198] or photokeratitis [385], in which ocular inflam￾mation is prominent, neurons at the VcC1 region, but not at the
ViVc transition, develop hypersensitivity to ocular surface stimuli,
while ocular neurons at both regions display increased convergent
input from periocular skin, consistent with allodynia reported by
some DED patients. Enlarged cutaneous receptive field areas of
dorsal horn neurons after nerve injury or inflammation are thought
to be due strictly to central brain mechanisms and to reflect spatial
summation, a key component of central sensitization [386]. In a rat
model for tear deficiency, ocular neurons at both the ViVc transition
and VcC1 region display enhanced responsiveness to activation of
ocular surface sensory neurons with hypertonic saline and enlarged
convergent cutaneous receptive field areas [322]. The cellular and
molecular mechanisms for hyperalgesia of ocular neurons at the
ViVc transition and VcC1 region in models for DED are not known.
Hypersensitivity of CNS neurons is thought to derive from a com￾bination of increased excitatory synaptic drive and/or loss of
inhibitory controls [5,338]. Central administration of a selective
NMDA receptor antagonist reduces acute corneal-evoked activation
of ocular neurons in both regions [387], while blockade of sub￾stance P receptors preferentially reduces activation of ocular neu￾rons at the VcC1 region [388]. Local microinjection of the GABAA
receptor agonist, muscimol, greatly reduces corneal-evoked neural
activity at the ViVc transition and VcC1 region [208]. Even brief
stimulation of sensory nerves at C fiber strength is sufficient to
induce prolonged activation of microglia in spinal dorsal horn
[389], however, similar studies have not assessed the role of
microglia in animal models for ocular pain. Collectively, these
studies suggest that second-order neurons at the ViVc transition
and VcC1 region contribute to ocular-related hyperalgesia in
addition to mediating more specialized aspects of ocular function
such as lacrimation and eye blink. In future studies, it will be critical
to determine how persistent tear reduction influences excitatory
and inhibitory synaptic mechanisms of ocular neurons in the TBNC.
Central sensitization can develop in the setting of ongoing
afferent nociceptive traffic that occurs with peripheral sensitization
[390,391]. Anatomically, corneal nociceptors have their cell bodies
in the TG and synapse in two main areas of the TBNC, the ViVc
transition and the spinomedullary junction or the Vc/C1-2 region
[100,392,393]. Dry-responsive neurons have been identified in the
ViVc transition, and a subgroup of these neurons receive additional
converging input from corneal afferents sensitive to other stimuli
such as acidity, heat and noxious chemicals [100,190]. Cornea￾responsive neurons at the ViVc transition and at the VcC1 region
receive both innocuous and noxious sensory information and
display increased responsiveness in an animal model for tear
deficient DED [322]. This suggests that central sensitization occurs
at multiple levels of the TBNC in DED.
On a molecular level, NMDA receptor activation may partially
underlie the phenotypic changes seen in neurons during central
sensitization. For example, NMDA receptor activation can lead to
the progressive increase in the firing of second order neurons of the
TBNC, even with sub-threshold noxious stimuli, clinically mani￾festing as hyperalgesia and allodynia [394]. In vitro, co-culture ex￾periments have identified NMDA receptors as important in the
communication between corneal epithelial cells and TG sensory
neurons [395]. In a rat model for ocular nociception, NMDA re￾ceptors located on peripheral neurons or on postsynaptic neurons
in the TBNC play a key role in transmission of nociceptive signals
from the primary afferent neurons to central pain pathways [387].
Interactions between glial cells and neurons likely have an
important role in the pathophysiology of chronic pain [396,397].
Preclinical studies have found that activated microglia and astro￾cytes mediate the generation and maintenance of several pain
states [398] in a fashion modulated by specific genetic poly￾morphisms and circulating pro-inflammatory cytokines [399]. Glial
activation in the brain as a consequence of stress (eg traumatic
brain injury or systemic inflammatory responses) can induce the
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines that directly amplify
spinal cord synaptic transmission and induce central sensitization
to pain via signal amplification [397]. Peripheral and systemic in-
flammatory responses can also lead to microglial activation and
depression via monoaminergic, glutamatergic and neurotrophic
mechanisms [400].
5.3. Descending mechanisms
The activity in ascending excitatory nociceptive pathways is
modulated by descending control pathways from higher brain
centers that may exert facilitatory or inhibitory effects on spinal
Fig. 5. Schematic diagram summarizing how ocular inflammation of various etiologies or ocular surface dryness in DED, provoke variable increases (þ) or decreases ( ) of nerve
impulse activity in polymodal- and mechano-nociceptors and in cold thermoreceptors of the high background, low threshold (HB-LT) and low background, high threshold (LB-HT)
types. Together these changes evoke conscious sensations of different quality, as well as changes in tear flow and in spontaneous and reflex blinking.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 420
and trigeminal sensory input [384,401]. However, the role of
descending control systems in DED is not known. Normally, in￾terneurons within the central pain pathway release neurotrans￾mitters including gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) and glycine,
which are involved in the inhibition of nociceptive signaling [402].
However, after a noxious insult, the ensuing inflammatory cascade
in the spinal cord may reduce the GABA-mediated inhibitory in-
fluence on the ascending pathway or even make the GABA inputs
excitatory [5]. In a rat model for ocular nociception, application of
muscimol, a GABA receptor agonist, inhibited corneal input to both
ViVc transition and VcC1 neurons [208]. A loss of the inhibitory
GABA-mediated chloride current may allow for an upregulation of
ascending pain pathway signals and thus a chronic neuropathic
pain state [403,404].
Quantitative sensory testing can assess abnormalities in the
ascending and descending pain pathways. Chronic pain patients
(not involving the eye) often display greater temporal summation
following repetitive presentations of a noxious stimulus (“wind
up”) [405,406] and reduced descending controls, or conditioned
pain modulation, as compared to normal subjects [407].
5.4. Contribution of peripheral and central mechanisms to DED
discomfort and pain
Peripheral and central neural mechanisms participate in the
development of adverse symptoms of discomfort, dryness or
burning pain in DED patients and their relief is the main reason for
them to seek medical attention [404,408,409]. However, efforts to
manage symptoms in chronic moderate to severe DED by ocular
treatments alone have been inadequate [410,411]. Peripherally
mediated DED pain or discomfort symptoms are presumed to
originate by noxious stimulation of sensory neurons supplying the
ocular surface (see Section 2.1). In DED, an inadequate or unstable
tear film is the likely cause of tear hyperosmolarity and local surface
drying leading to damage of the ocular surface tissues, including
nerve terminals. Indeed, tear breakup is associated with increased
sensation [141,412] and repeated episodes of tear breakup have
been shown to lead to DED-like symptoms of ocular irritation [413].
Noxious stimulation arising from an inadequate tear film may also
lead to inflammation which results in sensitization of the sensory
terminals at the ocular surface (see Section 5.1), rendering previ￾ously non-noxious or low power stimuli able to evoke sensation
[414]. If the underlying cause is not addressed and ameliorated, the
increased activity of peripheral sensory neurons may lead to central
sensitization. Although in most cases ocular surface pain has a
proximate physical cause, it may be reported in the absence of
tissue damage or any likely pathophysiological cause, but still
should be accepted as pain [415]. Indeed, the weak correlation
between signs and symptoms in DED [416e418] is consistent with
the notion that sensitization of eye sensory pathways is triggered
by events that may occur well before the patient enters the clinic.
When peripheral nerve injury/inflammation due to disturbances of
ocular surface homeostasis generates functional and anatomical
alterations at higher levels of eye pain pathways, central pain
largely independent of the original cause may develop and persist
without an obvious relationship with the peripheral nociceptive
input. Instillation of a topical anesthetic at the surface of the eye has
been suggested as a simple and immediate way to differentiate pain
arising from activation of peripheral sensory nerve terminals from
that arising at a more proximal site in the sensory neuron or in the
CNS [419].
Fig. 6 summarizes the peripheral and central neural mecha￾nisms involved in the generation of perceptual, autonomic and
motor responses in DED.
Fig. 6. Peripheral and central neural mechanisms involved in the sensory and autonomic responses evoked by ocular surface dryness. The main types of ion channels involved in the
transduction and coding of mechanical, thermal and chemical stimuli are represented in the inset.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 421
Clinical identification of the neurological mechanisms underly￾ing pain is important in order to define therapies. This is required to
distinguish nociceptive from neuropathic pain, whose definition
has been restricted to lesion or disease affecting the somatosensory
system [420]. Precise identification of the neural mechanism un￾derlying discomfort or pain reported by patients with a diagnosis of
DED is often difficult with the exploration tools available today to
evaluate the neurobiology of the ocular surface and the functional
state of central neural pathways involved in eye pain (see TFOS
DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology report) [545].
6. Evaluation of ocular surface neurobiology
6.1. Patient-reported characteristics (surveys, questionnaires)
Numerous questionnaires have been developed for DED (see
TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology and Epidemiology reports)
[545, 546]. Most of these DED questionnaires were developed from
a clinical perspective, aiming to understand the symptoms associ￾ated with the condition and develop diagnostic tools based on
symptoms. Using this approach, the discomfort category of DED
symptoms has been characterized as ocular dryness, irritation,
soreness, grittiness, scratchiness or achiness, but may also contain
questions about burning and stinging. Many DED questionnaires
also include questions on foreign body sensation (feeling like
‘something is in the eye’) and light sensitivity [421e424]. Inter￾estingly, dryness is not always queried in DED questionnaires [421].
It is also important to note that the words chosen as symptoms in
these questionnaires depend heavily on language, which may take
seemingly different meanings when translated. For example, “tired
eyes” has been reported as the most common symptom of DED in
Japan [425], but is included in only a few questionnaires in English
[422,426].
Ocular pain and discomfort have also been measured by other
questionnaires that were not specifically developed for DED. The
National Eye Institute Visual Functioning Questionnaire (NEI VFQ-
25) queries pain and discomfort around the eyes and vision￾related quality of life, which is appropriate for the dry eye condi￾tion due to its effects on vision [427,428]. In one study, the ocular
pain subscale of the NEI VFQ-25 was shown to be substantially
lower (worse) for patients with DED than for eight other
ophthalmic conditions [428]. The Eye Sensation Scale was devel￾oped to measure ocular pain, specifically to assess pain relief
following corneal transplantation surgery [429]. Recently, a new
questionnaire, the Ocular Pain Assessment Survey (OPAS), was
validated to assess ocular pain in a variety of ocular conditions,
from corneal ulcers to DED [430]. In addition to the eye, the OPAS
queries the location of pain elsewhere in the body, supporting
recent findings that DED symptoms closely align with non-ocular
pain [409,431]. A grading system based on clinical judgement, to
define the level of certainty that the pain in an individual is
neuropathic in nature was proposed in 2008 by a Special Interest
group of IASP [432] and revised recently [420]. This system dis￾tinguishes Possible, Probable and Definite Neuropathic Pain grades.
An extension of these criteria to DED or other pain conditions in the
eye has not been yet made, but may serve as a tool to distinguish
definite ocular neuropathic pain from the discomfort and pain
experienced in many eye pathologies.
6.2. Psychophysical characteristics
While corneal and conjunctival sensory function has been
evaluated using electrophysiological recording in animals, this
experimental approach cannot be used in humans. Consequently,
the evaluation of subjective responses to controlled stimulation of
the ocular surface has been applied to capture human ocular sen￾sory information. The use of mechanical, chemical or thermal
stimuli has been enabled by various esthesiometer designs,
including the Cochet Bonnet esthesiometer and the gas jet esthe￾siometer [433e436].
Depending on the experimental or psychophysical paradigm
and instrument used, different qualities of the sensitivity or
sensation response can be determined. Measurement of detection
thresholds is the most common method, allowing ease of com￾parison between conditions and analysis of change. Thresholds to
mechanical, chemical and thermal stimuli have been measured
using a variety of psychophysical techniques, including method of
limits [437], method of constant stimuli [129] and staircasing
techniques [438]. As with other sensory systems, which may show
adaptation or sensitization, different psychophysical methods
result in different threshold values. Discrepancies in threshold may
also result from physiological variations in sensitivity, variations
due to disease, as well as method-related variations including
stimulus duration, distance of probe from the ocular surface and
characteristics of the gas stimulus.
A number of investigators have also utilized subjective grading
of suprathreshold stimuli in order to determine the relationship
between the magnitude of the stimulus presented and its perceived
intensity [63,64,317,435,439], and some have made observations of
the quality and attributes of the evoked sensations
[63,64,435,439e441]. Other suprathreshold approaches have
included grading of just noticeable differences in sensation [442],
threshold differences in sensation [443], matching detection
thresholds to the discomfort experienced and grading the intensity
or assigning a descriptor to suprathreshold stimuli. Sensations
evoked can be evaluated quantitatively and qualitatively and
compared with the receptor properties established in animal
models [63], providing a clearer understanding of the processes
involved in human ocular surface sensitivity.
Psychophysical studies have demonstrated that the eyelid
margins are sensitive to mechanical stimuli [444e446], but re￾sponses to other types of stimuli have not been assessed. Careful
assessment of the tactile sensitivity of the eyelid margins indicates
that the occlusional surface has lower sensitivity than the marginal
angle where the eyelid margin contacts the surface of the eye [445].
Studies also indicate that the tactile sensitivity of lower eyelid
margin is higher than that of upper eyelid margin [445,446].
Interestingly, in healthy subjects, the tactile sensitivity of the lower
eyelid margin was positively correlated with tear osmolarity [446],
however, neither eyelid sensitivity nor tear osmolarity correlated
with symptoms of DED.
6.2.1. Ocular surface sensitivity and DED
Table 1 summarizes studies that have evaluated ocular surface
sensitivity in various populations of DED subjects, and the associ￾ations between sensitivity and symptoms reported. While subject
numbers are frequently low in individual studies, corneal sensi￾tivity to a pure mechanical stimulus, such as the Cochet Bonnet
instrument, is consistently reduced in DED [372,447e453]. Of the
different subclasses of DED patients, those presumed as demon￾strating aqueous deficient DED consistently present with reduced
corneal sensitivity using the Cochet Bonnet instrument, and this
has been attributed to the greater corneal epithelial disruption
assessed by corneal staining [454]. In Sjogren syndrome, the €
decrement in corneal sensitivity to mechanical stimuli was simi￾larly associated with the degree of corneal staining [455]. In a
cohort with DED defined by clinical signs and symptoms, the de￾gree of reduction in corneal mechanical sensitivity was associated
with severity of clinical signs, including tear film signs [453].
Some studies, particularly those using a gas jet aesthesiometer
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 422
with mechanical stimuli delivered either at eye temperature or at
room temperature have shown an increased [371,456e458] or
decreased [454,459,460] corneal sensitivity in DED. This apparent
dichotomy could be related to the type of stimulus, where a gas jet
aesthesiometer delivers a more complex stimulus than the pure
mechanical stimulus of the Cochet Bonnet aesthesiometer; gas jet
and contact aesthesiometers vary in stimulus composition and
mode of stimulation and are therefore likely to assess different
aspects of the neural response [461]. Aside from a mechanical
stimulus, the gas jet stimulus may induce a cooling/evaporative/
tear thinning effect that may stimulate cold thermoreceptors in
addition to mechano-nociceptors and polymodal nociceptors, even
with stimuli delivered at eye temperature. Given the likely rele￾vance of corneal cold themoreceptors in DED, it is conceivable that
augmented activity of these fibres in DED is associated with an
increased corneal sensitivity to cooling stimuli.
An additional cause of the differences in corneal sensitivity
among DED patients is that sensitivity may vary between DED
subtypes or with disease severity. Recent studies have shown that
patients exhibiting high DED symptom severity scores and neuro￾pathic pain symptom inventory scores have lower mechanical
thresholds and pain thresholds measured with a gas esthesiometer
[458]. Also, in patients showing DED symptoms, touch sensitivity
measured with the Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer was not signifi-
cantly altered, but the mechanical threshold required to evoke
blinking and to report pain was lower than in asymptomatic sub￾jects [462]. These observations suggest that in DED the reduction of
corneal sensitivity, caused by damage to the sensory nerve endings,
may be accompanied by central sensitization due to abnormal
ongoing activity in injured corneal nerve fibers, trigeminal neurons
and higher order neurons of the central ocular pain pathways
leading to neuropathic pain symptoms. This mechanism may also
underpin the report of eye discomfort symptoms in the presence of
reduced corneal sensitivity to external stimuli. The relationship
between corneal sensitivity in DED and disease severity is often
confounded by a lack of knowledge of the time of disease onset
[463]. For example, persistent ocular surface damage may ulti￾mately cause central nervous system sensitization and the
involvement of neuropathic mechanisms.
Corneal sensitivity has been discussed as a potential biomarker
in DED [464]. One study has demonstrated an improvement in
corneal sensitivity following cyclosporine therapy [450]. There are
however concerns for the repeatability of corneal sensitivity mea￾surements in DED over a three month period without intervention
[453], although in normal subjects, good repeatability has been
demonstrated [465].
6.2.2. Neuropathic pain
Neuropathic pain (neuralgia) is pain caused by damage or dis￾ease affecting the somatosensory nervous system and is often
chronic in nature [467]. This pain can be associated with any part of
the body including the eyes, but as it is not caused by the patho￾physiology of DED (see TFOS DEWS II Pathophysiology report
[544]), it should not be diagnosed as DED (see TFOS DEWS II
Diagnostic Methodology report [545]). As commented above
(Section 5.1.2) neuro-sensory dysfunction is a recognized feature of
DED [404,468], but this aspect of the disease is not routinely
evaluated or considered in clinical practice. DED-related neuro￾sensory dysfunction may account for the lack of association be￾tween signs and symptoms and those DED patients who remain
symptomatic despite adherence to therapy.
6.3. Objective metrics
6.3.1. Blink parameters
Blinking is commonly quantified by measuring the blink rate
[315,320,321,323,329,331,469] or its reciprocal value, the inter￾blink interval [318,324,333]. Neurologically, the blink rate is theo￾retically set by an endogenous spontaneous blink generator located
in the spinal trigeminal complex that is modulated by afferent input
from the cornea, dopamine levels in the brain and cognitive state
[333]. (see Section 4).
It is well established that stimulation of the ocular surface leads
to an increased blink rate [315,318], whereas surface anesthesia
leads to a decreased blink rate [319]. This observation has been
used to explain the increased blink rate in DED, presumably caused
by ocular surface irritation due to surface dryness or an unstable
tear film [196,333]. Experimental evidence in animals has shown
Table 1
Corneal sensitivity and symptoms report in DED.
Author(s)/Year Subjects Sensitivity (with [symptoms) Esthesiometer Symptoms questionnaire
Xu et al. (1996) [447] SS (n ¼ 15) þ DED (n ¼ 44) Y COBO not stated
Versura et al. (2007) [448] SS (n ¼ 66) þ DED (n ¼ 59) Y COBO OSDI
Barboza et al. (2008) [449] SS (n ¼ 17) Y COBO OSDI
Toker and Asfuroglu (2010) [450] SS (n ¼ 23) þ DED (n ¼ 14) Ycornea þ conjunctiva COBO OSDI
Bourcier et al. (2005) [466] SS (n ¼ 14) þ DED (n ¼ 30) Y* BGE burning, itching, stinging
Benitez-del-Castillo et al. (2007) [460] SS (n ¼ 11) þ DED (n ¼ 10) Y* BGE not stated
De Paiva and Pflugfelder (2004) [457] DED (n ¼ 20) [ modified BGE 11 items
Situ et al. (2008) [456] DED (n ¼ 43) [* cornea þ conjunctiva modified BGE (20  C) OSDI, SeSOD
Tuisku et al. (2008) [371] SS (n ¼ 20) [* modified BGE OSDI
Labbe et al. (2012) [452] DED (n ¼ 12) Y COBO not measured
Kim et al. (2012) [451] RA DE (n ¼ 106) Y COBO OSDI
Labbe et al. (2013) [372] DED (n ¼ 43) Y COBO OSDI
Nepp and Wirth (2015) [453] DED (n ¼ 46) Y COBO not measured
Rahman et al. (2015) [454] MGD (n ¼ 11)
SS (n ¼ 3)
DED (n ¼ 7)
CC (n ¼ 12)
Y (DED only) COBO and
Jet aesthesiometer (28  C)
OSDI, VAS
Spierer et al. (2016) [458] DED (n ¼ 129) [ modified BGE (23e26  C) DEQ-5, OSDI
Kaido et al. (2016) [462] DED (n ¼ 21) No change in touch sensitivity
[ pain sensitivity
[ blink sensitivity
COBO 12 item questionnaire
Key: SS, Sjogren's Syndrome; DED, dry eye disease; BGE, Belmonte's gas esthesiometer; COBO, Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer; MGD, meibomian gland dysfunction; € OSDI,
ocular surface disease index; CC, conjunctivochalasis.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 423
that chronic reduction of basal tearing produced by surgical
removal of the main lacrimal gland increases background activity of
corneal cold thermoreceptors [28]; conversely, basal blinking of
TRPM8 null mice, whose cold thermoreptor background activity is
absent, is very low [101]. These findings indicate that cold ther￾moreceptors contribute to the peripheral tonic drive maintaining
basal blinking. Although corneal nerve terminals in DED patients
are often reported to be less sensitive to external mechanical,
thermal and chemical stimuli [455,459], this does not exclude the
possibility that, in parallel, they display enhanced spontaneous
firing (see Section 5.1.2). An increase in spontaneous activity may
explain ongoing discomfort and an augmented basal blink rate in
DED patients [28,196,333], while a low blink rate may be a causa￾tive factor in DED [470]. The Ocular Protection Index (OPI) is based
on the idea that the blink rate can be too slow to compensate for
more rapid tear breakup [471]. Thus, changes in the blink rate can
be considered both a cause and an effect of DED.
Aside from blink rate, other blink parameters include the
amplitude, duration and velocity of the upward and downward
phases of the blink (see section 4). Regardless of whether the blinks
are spontaneous, reflex or voluntary, all blinks show a similar
pattern. The down phase is very rapid and the up phase is slower,
with the maximum velocity of the down phase roughly double that
of the up phase [314]. In a group of normal subjects, Evinger et al.
[314] showed that the maximum velocity of the down and up phase
show a linear relationship to blink amplitude, meaning that a fuller
blink tends to be faster and vice versa. In addition, they found that
the duration of most blinks changed little with blink amplitude.
However, some factors are known to alter blink duration. Wu
et al. found that ocular surface stimulation by air tended to increase
down phase blink duration and some subjects demonstrated clus￾ter blinking [318]. This supports the hypothesis that ocular surface
irritation can prolong blink duration and enhance blink excitability,
perhaps for protective purposes [312]. However, concentration on a
task descreased blink duration, presumably to minimize interrup￾tion of vision by the lid. In addition, an increased variability in the
relationship between maximum blink velocity and amplitude for
DED subjects has been reported, suggesting that individual subjects
may respond differently [318].
Partial or low amplitude blinking is common and some studies
have found that blink amplitude and blink rate decreased with
concentration on a visual task [324,332]. Twenty-nine percent of
blinks were partial or lower than 100% amplitude, but most (71%)
covered the pupil, suggesting that blinks are necessary to wet the
cornea over the pupil to provide a smooth tear film surface for good
vision [317].
Blinking can be affected by several factors other than ocular
surface stimulation or spontaneous firing of ocular surface nerves.
The effect of cognitive input on the blink rate is marked, especially
during a visual task, when the blink rate can markedly slow
[316,320,321,331,472]. Blink rate can be altered by task, lighting,
time of day and time period of data collection. Given the large
percentage of the population that works on computers, this is likely
to be a major cause of the increasing incidence of ergonomic dry
eye complaints. Engaging in conversation and daydreaming can
also affect blink rate [328e330], so that any clinical measure of
blink rate should include information about task and lighting
because blink rate varies so widely with mood and task. Time of day
should also be included as blink rate is known to vary diurnally,
presumably due to changing dopamine levels over the day [333].
Another aspect that affects measurement of the blink rate is the
length of the time period of data collection. Kaminer et al. showed
that shorter periods of data collection generated a higher blink rate
than did longer periods, attributed to the increased probability of
smaller inter-blink intervals when short periods of eye blink data
were data collected [333].
6.3.2. In vivo confocal microscopy of corneal nerves and immune
cells
With increased focus on corneal neurobiology in DED, there is
an urgent need for the development of new biomarkers in this area.
However, objective assessment of ocular surface neurobiology has
been challenging for clinicians, given that corneal nerves cannot be
visualized in detail by slit-lamp examination and that accurate
functional tests are not widely available. Corneal IVCM, allows
high-resolution in vivo visualization of subbasal corneal nerves and
immune cells at a cellular level, providing an image resolution
closer to the one obtained with histochemical methods. In partic￾ular, the Heidelberg Retina Tomograph with the Rostock Cornea
Module (HRT/RCM, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany),
is a laser-scanning IVCM that uses a 670 nm diode laser [473], and
allows real-time imaging of the cornea, generating a 400  400 mm
images and a lateral resolution of 1mm/pixel. Recent studies
demonstrated that there are no significant differences in the mean
nerve and immune cell densities in the central cornea between
representative standard IVCM images and wide-field composite
images, confirming that standard images can be used in clinical
studies to accurately assess cellular structures [474]. IVCM allows
detection of changes in the subbasal nerve plexus in patients with
corneal neuropathy and corneal neuralgia from DED or other ocular
and systemic conditions, which can be monitored for disease
severity and response to treatment [475,476].
6.3.2.1. Corneal nerves. There are several published qualitative and
quantitative IVCM studies of the central corneal nerve plexus in
patients with DED that attempt to elucidate alterations in corneal
innervation and their clinical significance [477,478]. These studies
have demonstrated rather conflicting results regarding nerve
density. Most studies have reported a decrease in nerve density in
both Sjogren and non-Sj € ogren DED patients € [452,460,474,479],
correlating to decrease in corneal sensitivity [372,447,452,460,480].
In contrast Hos¸ al et al. [481] and Tuominen et al. [368] observed no
change in subbasal nerve density in DED patients compared with
controls, while Zhang et al. reported increased corneal nerve den￾sity in patients with Sjogren's syndrome ( € Table 2) [482]. The latter
study corresponds to studies showing hypersensitivity of the
cornea [371,483]. The discrepancies in findings related to changes
in nerve density may be attributed to either different stages and
severity of DED that induce different degeneration/regeneration
patterns of nerves, levels of inflammation, or levels of corneal
hyperalgesia and allodynia after repeated insults to corneal nerves.
More consistency has been shown regarding other morphological
nerve parameters, such as increased tortuosity, reflectivity and
beading [368,369,460,480,482,484,485]. These changes are
believed to arise from initial damage and subsequent regeneration
of subbasal corneal nerves.
Correlation of nerve alterations by IVCM to clinical signs and
symptoms has been shown in several studies. Benitez et al. found
that subbasal nerve density and corneal sensation correlated with
Schirmer test results [460]. Further, Zhang et al. demonstrated that
beading of corneal nerves was inversely related to corneal damage
assessed with rose bengal staining [484]. Moreover, Labbe et al.
revealed that both subbasal nerve density and corneal sensitivity
were negatively correlated with the severity of DED [372]. Finally, a
recent randomized clinical trial demonstrated that only patients
with near-normal corneal nerve density showed improvements in
both symptoms and signs after one-month therapy with artificial
tears or the topical steroid, loteprednol, while patients with low
corneal nerve density did not demonstrate changes in signs or
symptoms, providing one possible explanation for the variability in
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 424
therapeutic response [474].
Corneal nerve injury due to inflammatory processes, followed
by altered excitability in regenerated nerves [475,476,486], may
result in the development of hyperalgesia or allodynia in patients
with DED. These findings potentially explain the variability of their
response to therapy and the different effects of DED on subbasal
nerve density observed in various IVCM studies. In these patients,
the formation of microneuromas, abrupt swellings of injured nerve
endings formed during regeneration, is caused by sprouting from
endbulbs [368,371,404].
A new and highly promising use for IVCM is the clinically
challenging differentiation between DED-induced discomfort and
light sensitivity from corneal neuralgia or photoallodynia in pa￾tients with corneal neuropathy, given their similar symptomatic
presentation and potential clinical overlap [404,408,409,468].
Particularly in patients with ocular pain, with notoriously poor
correlation between clinical signs and symptoms [417,487,488],
IVCM may allow the diagnosis of corneal neuropathy with quan￾tifiable changes in corneal subbasal nerve metrics [475,476,486].
IVCM in patients with corneal neuropathy demonstrates the pres￾ence of microneuromas, increased beading and reflectivity, as well
as a more profound loss of subbasal nerves [475,476]. In recent
studies, the treatment of patients with corneal neuropathy-induced
photoallodynia or neuralgia with autologous serum tears demon￾strated restoration of nerve topography through nerve regenera￾tion, correlating with decreased symptoms of photoallodynia and
pain scores [475,476]. While IVCM does not distinguish causality
from secondary effects, additional IVCM studies in more homoge￾nous populations would shed light on the pathophysiology of
corneal neuropathic disease and DED. IVCM also shows promise in
monitoring the corneal neurogenerative response to treatment.
Methods to automate quantitative IVCM meausures would greatly
enhance research methodology and interpretion of results.
6.3.2.2. Corneal immune cells. Recent studies show that inflam￾mation plays a significant role in the development of DED [349].
One of the major participants of the immune system in DED are the
APCs that induce T cell activation and thereby initiate an inflam￾matory cascade [489,490]. Among APCs, corneal DCs are involved in
the development of DED [349,491,492]. To evaluate immune cell
alterations in patients with DED, IVCM has recently been used to
visualize DCs in the cornea. Results from these studies are
consistent with immunohistochemical findings [493,494] showing
that epithelial DCs are primarily located in close proximity to the
subbasal nerve plexus [148].
Several IVCM studies have assessed the density and distribution
of DCs and other immune cells in DED and demonstrated an
increased density of DCs [371,477e480,495e500]. Lin et al. also
showed that central and peripheral corneal DCs were significantly
increased in both non-Sjogren and Sj € ogren syndrome DED, as €
compared to normal subjects [495]. Further, they showed putative
activation of DCs as documented by the increased presence of
dendrites on these cells. Similarly, increased density of purportedly
mature DCs in DED patients with underlying systemic immune
diseases has been reported [371,474]. Moreover, comparison be￾tween patients with presumed aqueous-deficient and evaporative
DED showed that DC density is significantly higher in aqueous￾deficient DED [474].
Alterations of epithelial DC density correlate with clinical signs
and symptoms of DED [499,501]. Thus IVCM may serve as a useful
supplementary assessment tool for clinical diagnosis of DED and for
determining the need for anti-inflammatory therapy. Further, IVCM
can be used serially to objectively assess the therapeutic success of
an anti-inflammatory therapy [499,501]. However, additional
studies are required to validate utility of IVCM imaging of DC in
clinical practice, including the development of analytical tools to
automate and standardize image analysis. Evaluation of DCs could
also be used for treatment stratification and measurement of
therapeutic efficacy when used with clinical tests (see TFOS DEWS
II Management report) [547].
6.3.3. Biomarkers in tears
Biomarkers in tears can potentially be used as an indicator of the
status of ocular surface innervation, DED severity or as a measure of
disease progression or response to treatment.
6.3.3.1. Nerve growth factor. NGF and its receptors are upregulated
following damage to the ocular surface or its innervation [502,503]
and the levels return to normal following wound healing [504].
Tear levels of NGF are elevated immediately post-laser-assisted in
situ keratomileusis (LASIK) and remain increased until at least 6
months post-surgery [505]. Table 3 shows the levels of NGF in tears
are also elevated in non-Sjogren DED € [506] and in contact lens
related DED [507].
Table 2
Nerve morphology changes described in DED and Sjogren syndrome, and associations with sensitivity. €
Author(s)/Year Subjects Control Nerve morphology parameters Association with
sensitivity Density/number Tortuosity Branching Beading Other
Tuominen et al.,
2003 [368]
SS (n ¼ 10) normal (n ¼ 10) e altered e e [sprouting e
Benitez del Castillo et al.,
2004, 2007 [369,460]
DED (n ¼ 10)
SS (n ¼ 11)
normal (n ¼ 20) Y [ no D [ no D thickness,
reflectivity
Sensitivity associated
with density (BGE)
Zhang et al., 2005 [484] DED (n ¼ 30)
SS (n ¼ 8)
normal (n ¼ 30) no D (DED)
[ (SS)
[ [ no D no D thickness, e
Hosal et al., 2005 [481] DED (n ¼ 6)
SS (n ¼ 10)
normal (n ¼ 10) no D no D e e no D thickness,
reflectivity
e
Villani et al., 2007 [485] SS (n ¼ 35) normal (n ¼ 20) Y [ e ee Sensitivity associated
with tortuosity (COBO)
ErDEDlyi et al., 2007 [370] DED (n ¼ 10) normal (n ¼ 10) no D e no D no D e e
Tuisku et al., 2008 [371] SS (n ¼ 20) normal (n ¼ 10) no D eee [sprouting No association
(modified BGE)
Zhang et al., 2011 [482] DED (n ¼ 40) normal (n ¼ 20) e [ e e Subbasal nerve rupture
(moderate/severe DED)
e
Labbe et al., 2012 [452] DED (n ¼ 12) normal (n ¼ 10) Y no D no D no D no D thickness,
reflectivity
Sensitivity associated
with density (COBO)
Key: SS, Sjogren Syndrome; DED, dry eye disease; BGE Belmonte esthesiometer; COBO, Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer. €
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 425
6.3.3.2. Substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide. A sub￾stantial percentage of the sensory neurons supplying the ocular
surface contain neuropeptides including substance P, CGRP and
galanin [19,56,78,508]. These neuropeptides modulate epithelial
and immune cell function in normal and damaged cornea [56], and
play a role in local inflammation, wound healing and in the initi￾ation and maintenance of pain (see Section 2.4) [509]. At the ocular
surface specifically, CGRP induces epithelial cell differentiation and
substance P stimulates epithelial cell proliferation [86].
One study has shown that tear levels of CGRP are reduced in
DED patients and that tear CGRP levels are inversely associated
with DED severity, corneal fluorescein staining and Schirmer test
results (shown in Table 3) [506]. Exogenously delivered CGRP fa￾cilitates corneal epithelium repair in vivo in animals and in vitro in
cell culture models [510,511], which may be consistent with
reduced tear levels and increased ocular surface damage in DED.
There are no reported studies in humans that have evaluated the
effects of exogenous CRGP on nerve morphology, corneal sensitivity
or DED.
In contrast, the role of substance P in human DED is equivocal.
As can be seen in Table 3, there are a small number of studies
available with varying methodology and generally small sample
sizes. No studies have determined relationships between tear levels
of substance P and disease severity. The level of substance P in tears
appears to be unchanged in both Sjogren and non-Sj € ogren DED €
[506], but it is reduced in patients with corneal hyperesthesia [512],
compared to those with normal corneal sensitivity [506,513,514].
One study has investigated the levels of VIP and NPY in tears of
DED patients and found no differences in VIP levels, but reduced
levels of NPY compared to those of subjects with normal eyes [506].
NPY is released from sympathetic nerves and it is not known
whether the changes in tear NPY levels reflect changes in the
lacrimal gland (or other glandular tissues contributing the tears) or
arise as a consequence of ocular surface damage. NPY inhibits T cell
type I-driven inflammatory responses [515]. The lack of change in
VIP with DED may reflect the very limited innervation of the cornea
by VIP-expressing parasympathetic nerves [511].
There are other potential tear markers of inflammation and/or
ocular surface demage that have not yet been assessed in DED. Tear
levels of TNF-a, transforming growth factor (TGF-b), VEGF and
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) are increased immediately after
surface refractive surgery procedures and decline thereafter
[519e521]. These biomarkers are all likely to be relevant in wound
healing, and VEGF in particular may be relevant for corneal rein￾nervation as sequestration of this growth factor reduced recovery
of subbasal fibers in a mouse model of corneal injury [522].
7. Future directions
Understanding the characteristics of adverse sensations associ￾ated with the ocular surface is important since symptom presen￾tation is often the driving force behind treatment in DED [523].
Research to date has uncovered the complexity of peripheral and
central neural mechanisms associated with ocular surface sensa￾tions and tissue homeostasis; however, a thorough understanding
of this complexity in relation to DED is still not fully achieved.
Application to the eye, of the technological and conceptual ad￾vances to the understanding of pain made at the genetic, molecular,
cellular and integrative level in other tissue pathologies, could help
extend our knowledge of neural mechanisms underlying DED
dysesthesias. Also, development of adequate animal models aimed
at reproducing this pathology, and analyzing experimentally inte￾grative neural mechanisms, will help to refine the present knowl￾edge on how unpleasant sensations originate in DED. New
instruments and procedures designed to quantify eye sensations
and pain need to be developed both in experimental animals and in
humans, to correlate experimental and clinical data and to obtain
reliable, objective information on the psychophysical parameters of
normal and pathological sensations.
A second area of research important in furthering the under￾standing of pain and sensation at the ocular surface is the definition
and characterization of pain, referred to the eye, that has a neuro￾pathic origin. The lack of correlation between signs and symptoms
of DED has made research and clinical practice challenging for
many [417]. Differentiating DED-evoked nociceptive pain from
peripheral and central neuropathic ocular pain is important in
successful treatment of patients and in defining research ap￾proaches. The investigation of these questions using basic research
technology will help promote better understanding of the molec￾ular and cellular modifications taking place in the peripheral and
central ocular pain pathways in DED and how they develop, prog￾ress and eventually perpetuate. From a clinical perspective,
Table 3
Changes in tear concentration of neuromediators after refractive surgery and with DED compared with normal eyes.
Tear neuropeptide levels
Nerve Growth Factor (NGF) Substance P CGRP Neuropeptide Y Vasoactive
intestinal peptide
Refractive surgery Increased with PRK > LASIK
Mean NGF/total tear protein
PRK 89.2.8 ± 10.2 pg/mg,
LASIK 55.4 ± 11.7 pg/mg
at 1 month [505]
Increased after LASIK
9.6 ± 2.6 ng/ml at
1 month [516]
Increased with PRK
377 ± 83.2 ng/ml at
day 7 [517]
No change with LASIK
93.7 ± 59.6/ml [516]
n/a n/a
Non-Sjogren €
syndrome
Increased
186.5 ± 64.8 pg/ml [507,518]
No change [518] Reduced
3.0 ± 1.7 ng/ml [518]
No change
4.6 ± 3.9 ng/ml [518]
No change [518]
Sjogren syndrome € No change
54.5 ± 61.8 pg/ml [518]
No change [518] No change
6.0 ± 2.4 ng/ml [518]
Reduced
1.5 ± 0.3 ng/ml [518]
No change [518]
Ocular cicatrizing
pemphigoid
Increased 120.8 ± 53.3 pg/ml [518] Not reported [518] Reduced
2.3 ± 1.2 ng/ml [518]
Reduced
1.5 ± 2.0 ng/ml [518]
No change [518]
Normal eyes Mean 64.7 ± 48.0 pg/ml [518]
Mean NGF/total tear protein
32.8 ± 6.2 pg/mg [505]
Mean 2300 pg/ml [518]
Range 306-332
7.5 ± 1.7 ng/ml [516]
77.4 ± 75.7 ng/ml [516]
6.0 ± 2.2 ng/ml [518]
198 ± 36.6 ng/ml [517]
4.3 ± 1.9 ng/ml [518] Not reported [518]
CGRP, calcitonin gene-related peptide; PRK, photorefractive keratectomy; LASIK, laser in situ keratomileusis.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 426
neuropathic pain from a wide range of etiologies has been studied
in large samples of patients collected in multinational pain research
networks, and classified according to their intrinsic pain-related
sensory symptoms and signs which were associated with patho￾physiological mechanisms [420,524]. To extend this approach to
neuropathic pain associated with ocular sensory pathways could
help to extend the advances in diagnosis and therapy, made for
neuropathic pain affecting other body territories, to eye pain.
Neuropathic pain should not be diagnosed as DED (See section
6.2.2), but management when it manifests as dry eye symptoms,
needs further research. For patients who report pain in multiple
body parts as well as the eye, management of or referral for
neuropathic pain interventions should be evoked such as neuro￾pathic pain therapy [408,419], a diet rich in anti-oxidants [525,526],
systemic pharmacological agents traditionally used to manage pain
(such as anticonvulsants, tricyclic antidepressants, opioids)
[486,527,528,530] topical analgesia [531], neuromodulators (such
as diclofenac, gabapentin and pregabalin) [528,532e540],
GABAergics in late stage pain [529], and using stimulation therapies
and psychological treatments (including exercise, acupuncture,
“scrambler” or peripheral stimulation therapy, transcranial mag￾netic stimulation, transcranial direct current stimulation and
cognitive behavior therapy) [541e543]. These have mostly not been
investigated specifically for ocular neuropathic pain, but there is
evidence of effectiveness in neuropathic pain and/or chronic pain
syndromes, so further research is warranted.
8. Summary
The TFOS DEWS II Pain and Sensation Subcommittee report
provides a perspective of DED focused on pain. Pain can be divided
into nociceptive and neuropathic pain. Nociceptive pain occurs in
response to actual or threatened damage to tissues. However,
neuropathic pain occurs due to a lesion within the somatosensory
nervous system and does not have biological value.
Pain associated with DED is transmitted via the peripheral axons
of TG neurons innervating the cornea and conjunctiva. They form a
subepithelial nerve plexus in the stroma whose ascending branches
penetrate Bowman's layer and ramify extensively to terminate
within the surface epithelium layers. Functionally, corneal sensory
neurons can be classified as polymodal nociceptors, specific
mechano-nociceptors or cold thermoreceptor neurons. Polymodal
nociceptors are normally silent and respond to chemical, me￾chanical and thermal stimuli. They become sensitized by the in-
flammatory mediators released by ocular surface injury. TRPV1
channels are important for sensory transduction and sensitization
of polymodal nociceptors. Mechano-nociceptors are normally si￾lent at rest, and respond only to mechanical forces through
mechanosensitive ion channels such as Piezo2. Most cold ther￾moreceptors discharge continuously at tnormal eye surface tem￾perature with an increase or decreasing the firing frequency upon
cooling or warming, respectively. TRPM8 is the main transduction
channel for cooling or cold, and is also sensitive to changes in os￾molarity. Inter-blink tear evaporation causes discrete cooling of the
ocular surface and tear osmolarity rises, thereby augmenting basal
activity of cold thermoreceptors. This is consistent with the hy￾pothesis that cold-sensitive fibers contribute to the reflex control of
basal tear production and blinking (Figs. 5 and 6).
The TG neurons that supply the ocular surface project primarily
into two spatially discrete regions within the TBNC: the transition
region between caudal Vi and Vc (ViVc transition) and at the Vc/
upper cervical cord junction (VcC1 region). Evidence suggests that
the VcC1 region plays a dominant role in sensory-discriminative
aspects of ocular pain. ViVc transition and VcC1 neurons are
excited by bright light whereas only ViVc transition neurons are
activated by changes in the moisture status of the ocular surface.
Ocular neurons at the ViVc transition are more likely to project to
brain regions that control lacrimation (superior salivatory nucleus)
and eye blink (facial motor nucleus), while cornea-responsive
neurons in both regions project to the sensory thalamus. Thus, it
is suggested that ocular neurons at the ViVc transition play a sig￾nificant role in maintaining ocular surface homeostasis, while
neurons at VcC1 may be more concerned with the expression of
adverse symptoms (Fig. 6).
Autonomic sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves, whose
activity is regulated by reflex influences from sensory neurons
supplying the ocular surface, regulate the secretory activity of the
main lacrimal gland. Parasympathetic innervation of the main
lacrimal gland is extensive, while little is known about the neural
control of accessory lacrimal glands. While nerves are present
around the meibomian glands, there are no studies examining the
role of sensory or autonomic nerves and their neurotransmitters in
regulating the holocrine secretion of the meibomian gland. Acti￾vation of sensory nerves supplying the rat cornea evokes goblet cell
mucous secretion; however efferent nerve type(s) involved in this
reflex response remain to be established. Several non-neural pro￾cesses regulate the release of mucins from stratified squamous
cells, but to date no regulatory role for nerves or neurotransmitters
has been identified.
In addition to regulation of tear production, ocular surface
nerves mediating sensations contribute to blinking behavior. It has
been suggested that spontaneous blinking is maintained, at least in
part by the continuous nerve impulse firing of eye surface cold
thermoreceptors, an effect likely mediated by the connections of TG
neurons with brainstem ViVc neurons which in turn project to the
facial motoneurons (Cranial nerve VII). Nociceptive sensory input to
neurons at the VcC1 region initiates reflex eye blinking and,
through their projections to ViVc transition neurons, sets the blink
amplitude and peak velocity of corneal reflex blinks.
In DED, reduced tear secretion leaves the corneal epithelium
exposed to adverse environmental conditions that may result in
inflammation of the ocular surface and peripheral nerve damage.
Inflammation may sensitize polymodal nociceptors and mechano￾nociceptors, while depressing cold thermoreceptor activity. How￾ever, in experimental models of DED, sensitization of nociceptor
fibers is minor, whereas a prominent and abnormal increase in cold
thermoreceptor nerve activity occurs that parallels the morpho￾logical changes in corneal innervation. In trigeminal brainstem,
ocular surface-responsive neurons at both ViVc and VcC1 regions
display enhanced excitability.
Several questionnaires are available to assess pain and sensation
associated with DED. These questionnaires vary widely in wording,
the symptoms investigated, and scaling. In addition to question￾naires, esthesiometry can be used to assess the functional status of
the corneal nerves.
IVCM allows for visualization of nerves and inflammatory cells
in the corneal surface. DED is associated with morphological ab￾normalities in nerve terminals, such as increased tortuosity,
reflectivity and beading, while changes in nerve density are not
consistent. In addition, an increased density of inflammatory cells
in DED has been reported. Tear components may also help to
objectively assess DED. NGF is increased in DED while CGRP is
reduced. Substance P, neuropeptide Y and VIP appear to be
unchanged.
Disclosures
C. Belmonte: Avizorex (P, C, I), Matrix Biology Institute, Cooper
Vision (F); J. J. Nichols: Alcon, Allergan, Vistakon, (F); Alcon (R); S.
M. Cox: Alcon, Allergan, BruderHealthcare, ElevenBiotherapeutics,
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 427
Oculus, Kala, Shire, TearScience, Vistakon (F); C. G. Begley: Coop￾ervision, Santen Pharmaceutical (F); Johnson & Johnson Vision Care
(C); D.A. Dartt: Allergan, Coopervision (C); A. Galor: Allergan, Shire
(C), Veterans Affaies, NIH grants (F); P. Hamrah: Coopervision (F),
Eyegate Pharma, Jade Therapeutics, Novabay, Revision Optics,
Santen, Valeant (C), Allergan, Bausch & Lomb, Dompe, Glax￾oSmithKline, Shire (F, C); D. Jacobs: BostonSight (E); TECLens (C); M.
I. Rosenblatt: Alcon, Roche, Santen (C), Laurel Therapeutics (F, C),
Weill Cornell Medical College, University of Illinois at Chicago (P),
Sarentis Therapeutics (F,I,C); F. Stapleton: Alcon Laboratories,
Allergan, CooperVision, Johnson & Johnson Vision Care, Stiltec (F);
Nidek (C); J. S. Wolffsohn: Alcon, Aston EyeTech, Bausch & Lomb,
BetterVision Ltd, CooperVision, Eaglet Eye, European Union, Eye￾bag, EMPharma, EyeDocs, Gelflex, Innovate UK, Johnson & Johnson
Vision Care, Lenstec, Medmont, Rayner, Thea, Optimec, Visioncare 
Research (F); Aston EyeTech (I); British Contact Lens Association,
University of Houston, Visioncare Research, CooperVision (C);
Portable Aberrometer, Contrast Sensitivity Chart (P); Johnson &
Johnson (R).
J. A. Brock, D. A. Bereiter, J. J. Ivanusic, and N. A. McNamara have
no disclosures.
F (Financial Support), I (Personal Financial Interest), E (Employ￾ment), C (Consultant), P (Patent), R (Recipient), N (No Commercial
Relationship), S (non-remunerative).
Acknowledgements
Nino Longo (Catania, Italy) and Sabrina Zappia (Rome, Italy) for
creating and facilitating the illustrations for this report.
References
[1] Stapleton F, Marfurt C, Golebiowski B, Rosenblatt M, Bereiter D, Begley C,
et al. The TFOS international workshop on contact lens discomfort: report of
the subcommittee on neurobiology. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54(11):
TFOS71e97.
[2] Belmonte C, Tervo TT. Pain in and around the eye. In: McMahon SB,
Koltzenburg M, Tracey I, Turks DC, editors. Wall and Melzack's Textbook of
Pain. 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, USA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013.
[3] Wilson N. The semantics of pain in Greco-Roman antiquity. J Hist Neurosci
2013;22(2):129e43.
[4] IASP. The International Association for the Study of Pain: https://www.
iasp-pain.org.
[5] von Hehn CA, Baron R, Woolf CJ. Deconstructing the neuropathic pain
phenotype to reveal neural mechanisms. Neuron 2012;73:638e52.
[6] Ji RR, Berta T, Nedergaard M. Glia and pain: is chronic pain a gliopathy? Pain
2013;154(Suppl 1):S10e28.
[7] Bonica JJ. The management of pain of cancer. J Mich State Med Soc 1953;52:
284e90.
[8] Hoon MA. Molecular dissection of itch. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2015;34:61e6.
[9] Robertson SD, Plummer NW, de Marchena J, Jensen P. Developmental origins
of central norepinephrine neuron diversity. Nat Neurosci 2013;16(8):
1016e23.
[10] Valtcheva Manouela V, Samineni Vijay K, Golden Judith P, Gereau Robert W,
Davidson Steve. Enhanced nonpeptidergic intraepidermal fiber density and
an expanded subset of chloroquine-responsive trigeminal neurons in a
mouse model of dry skin itch. J Pain 2015;16(4):346e56.
[11] Leonardi Andrea, Castegnaro Angela, Valerio Alvise La Gloria,
Lazzarini Daniela. Epidemiology of allergic conjunctivitis. Curr Opin Allergy
Clin Immunol 2015;15(5):482e8.
[12] Nichols KK, Begley CG, Caffery B, Jones LA. Symptoms of ocular irritation in
patients diagnosed with dry eye. Optom Vis Sci 1999;76(12):838e44.
[13] Marfurt CF, Kingsley RE, Echtenkamp SE. Sensory and sympathetic inner￾vation of the mammalian cornea. A retrograde tracing study. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 1989;30(3):461e72.
[14] Bratton GR, Klemm WR, Hudson LC, Sherry CJ, Dziezyc J. Innervation of the
feline eyelids. Neurol Res 1992;14(5):369e74.
[15] van der Werf F, Baljet B, Prins M, Ruskell GL, Otto JA. Innervation of the
palpebral conjunctiva and the superior tarsal muscle in the cynomolgous
monkey: a retrograde fluorescent tracing study. J Anat 1996;189(Pt 2):
285e92.
[16] May PJ, Porter JD. The distribution of primary afferent terminals from the
eyelids of macaque monkeys. Exp Brain Res 1998;123(4):368e81.
[17] Morgan CW, Nadelhaft I, de Groat WC. Anatomical localization of corneal
afferent cells in the trigeminal ganglion. Neurosurgery 1978 May-Jun;2(3):
252e8.
[18] LaVail JH, Johnson WE, Spencer LC. Immunohistochemical identification of
trigeminal ganglion neurons that innervate the mouse cornea: relevance to
intercellular spread of herpes simplex virus. J Comp Neurol 1993;327(1):
133e40.
[19] De Felipe C, Gonzalez GG, Gallar J, Belmonte C. Quantification and immu￾nocytochemical characteristics of trigeminal ganglion neurons projecting to
the cornea: effect of corneal wounding. Eur J Pain 1999;3:31e9.
[20] Bron AJ, Tripathi R, Tripathi B. Wolff's Anatomy of the Eye and Orbit. 8th ed.
London, England: Chapman & Hall Medical; 1997.
[21] May CA. Description and function of the ciliary nerves-some historical re￾marks on choroidal innervation. Exp Eye Res 1997;65(1):1e5.
[22] Zander E, Weddell G. Observations on the innervation of the cornea. J Anat
1951;85:68e99.
[23] ten Tusscher MPM, Klooster J, van der Want JJL, Lamers WPMA,
Vrensen GFJM. The allocation of nerve fibres to the anterior eye segment and
peripheral ganglia of rats. I. The sensory innervation. Brain Res 1989;494(1):
95e104.
[24] Oduntan O, Ruskell G. The source of sensory fibres of the inferior conjunctiva
of monkeys. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1992;230(3):258e63.
[25] Oduntan AO. Cellular inflammatory response induced by sensory denerva￾tion of the conjunctiva in monkeys. J Anat 2005;206(3):287e94.
[26] Veiga Moreira TH, Gover TD, Weinreich D. Electrophysiological properties
and chemosensitivity of acutely dissociated trigeminal somata innervating
the cornea. Neuroscience 2007;148(3):766e74.
[27] Callejo G, Castellanos A, Castany M, Gual A, Luna C, Acosta MC, et al. Acid￾sensing ion channels detect moderate acidifications to induce ocular pain.
Pain 2015;156(3):483e95.
[28] Kovacs I, Luna C, Quirce S, Mizerska K, Callejo G, Riestra A, et al. Abnormal
activity of corneal cold thermoreceptors underlies the unpleasant sensations
in dry eye disease. Pain 2016;157(2):399e417.
[29] Lopez de Armentia M, Cabanes C, Belmonte C. Electrophysiological proper- 
ties of identified trigeminal ganglion neurons innervating the cornea of the
mouse. Neuroscience 2000;101(4):1109e15.
[30] Cabanes C, Lopez de Armentia M, Viana F, Belmonte C. Postnatal changes in 
membrane properties of mice trigeminal ganglion neurons. J Neurophysiol
2002;87(5):2398e407.
[31] Boada MD. Relationship between electrophysiological signature and defined
sensory modality of trigeminal ganglion neurons in vivo. J Neurophysiol
2013;109(3):749e57.
[32] Lallemend F, Ernfors P. Molecular interactions underlying the specification of
sensory neurons. Trends Neurosci 2012;35(6):373e81.
[33] Li CL, Li KC, Wu D, Chen Y, Luo H, Zhao JR, et al. Somatosensory neuron types
identified by high-coverage single-cell RNA-sequencing and functional het￾erogeneity. Cell Res 2016;26(1):83e102.
[34] Usoskin D, Furlan A, Islam S, Abdo H, Lonnerberg P, Lou D, et al. Unbiased €
classification of sensory neuron types by large-scale single-cell RNA
sequencing. Nat Neurosci 2015;18(1):145e53.
[35] De Felipe C, Belmonte C. c-Jun expression after axotomy of corneal trigem￾inal ganglion neurons is dependent on the site of injury. Eur J Neurosci
1999;11(3):899e906.
[36] Bron R, Wood RJ, Brock JA, Ivanusic JJ. Piezo2 expression in corneal afferent
neurons. J Comp Neurol 2014;522(13):2967e79.
[37] Müller LJ, Pels L, Vrensen GF. Ultrastructural organization of human corneal
nerves. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1996;37(4):476e88.
[38] Marfurt CF, Cox J, Deek S, Dvorscak L. Anatomy of the human corneal
innervation. Exp Eye Res 2010;90(4):478e92.
[39] Seyed-Razavi Y, Chinnery HR, McMenamin PG. A novel association between
resident tissue macrophages and nerves in the peripheral stroma of the
murine cornea. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55(3):1313e20.
[40] Rozsa AJ, Beuerman RW. Density and organization of free nerve endings in 
the corneal epithelium of the rabbit. Pain 1982;14(2):105e20.
[41] Schimmelpfennig B. Nerve structures in human central corneal epithelium.
Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1982;218(1):14e20.
[42] Ueda S, del Cerro M, LoCascio JA, Aquavella JV. Peptidergic and catechol￾aminergic fibers in the human corneal epithelium. An immunohistochemical
and electron microscopic study. Acta Ophthalmol Suppl 1989;192:80e90.
[43] Patel DV, McGhee CN. Mapping of the normal human corneal sub-Basal
nerve plexus by in vivo laser scanning confocal microscopy. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2005;46(12):4485e8.
[44] Cruzat A, Pavan-Langston D, Hamrah P. In vivo confocal microscopy of
corneal nerves: analysis and clinical correlation. Semin Ophthalmol 2010
Sep-Nov;25(5e6):171e7.
[45] He J, Bazan NG, Bazan HE. Mapping the entire human corneal nerve archi￾tecture. Exp Eye Res 2010;91(4):513e23.
[46] Yu CQ, Rosenblatt MI. Transgenic corneal neurofluorescence in mice: a new
model for in vivo investigation of nerve structure and regeneration. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48(4):1535e42.
[47] Dvorscak L, Marfurt CF. Age-related changes in rat corneal epithelial nerve
density. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49(3):910e6.
[48] Ivanusic JJ, Wood RJ, Brock JA. Sensory and sympathetic innervation of the
mouse and guinea pig corneal epithelium. J Comp Neurol 2013;521(4):
877e93.
[49] Harris LW, Purves D. Rapid remodeling of sensory endings in the corneas of
living mice. J Neurosci 1989;9(6):2210e4.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 428
[50] Rozsa AJ, Guss RB, Beuerman RW. Neural remodeling following experimental 
surgery of the rabbit cornea. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1983;24(8):1033e51.
[51] Shaheen BS, Bakir M, Jain S. Corneal nerves in health and disease. Surv
Ophthalmol 2014 May-Jun;59(3):263e85.
[52] De Cilla S, Ranno S, Carini E, Fogagnolo P, Ceresara G, Orzalesi N, et al. 
Corneal subbasal nerves changes in patients with diabetic retinopathy: an
in vivo confocal study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;50(11):5155e8.
[53] Kurbanyan K, Hoesl LM, Schrems WA, Hamrah P. Corneal nerve alterations in
acute Acanthamoeba and fungal keratitis: an in vivo confocal microscopy
study. Eye (Lond) 2012;26(1):126e32.
[54] Hamrah P, Cruzat A, Dastjerdi MH, Prüss H, Zheng L, Shahatit BM, et al.
Unilateral herpes zoster ophthalmicus results in bilateral corneal nerve
alteration: an in vivo confocal microscopy study. Ophthalmology
2013;120(1):40e7.
[55] Belmonte C, Garcia-Hirschfeled J, Gallar J. Neurobiology of ocular pain. Prog
Retin Eye Res 1996;16:117e56.
[56] Belmonte C, Acosta MC, Gallar J. Neural basis of sensation in intact and
injured corneas. Exp Eye Res 2004;78(3):513e25.
[57] Belmonte C, Aracil A, Acosta MC, Luna C, Gallar J. Nerves and sensations from
the eye surface. Ocul Surf 2004;2(4):248e53.
[58] Alamri A, Bron R, Brock JA, Ivanusic JJ. Transient receptor potential cation
channel subfamily V member 1 expressing corneal sensory neurons can be
subdivided into at least three subpopulations. Front Neuroanat 2015;9:71.
[59] Belmonte C, Giraldez F. Responses of cat corneal sensory receptors to me￾chanical and thermal stimulation. J Physiol 1981;321:355e68.
[60] Belmonte C, Gallar J, Pozo MA, Rebollo I. Excitation by irritant chemical
substances of sensory afferent units in the cat's cornea. J Physiol 1991;437:
709e25.
[61] Gallar J, Pozo MA, Tuckett RP, Belmonte C. Response of sensory units with
unmyelinated fibres to mechanical, thermal and chemical stimulation of the
cat's cornea. J Physiol 1993;468:609e22.
[62] MacIver MB, Tanelian DL. Structural and functional specialization of A delta
and C fiber free nerve endings innervating rabbit corneal epithelium. J
Neurosci 1993;13(10):4511e24.
[63] Chen X, Gallar J, Pozo MA, Baeza M, Belmonte C. CO2 stimulation of the
cornea: a comparison between human sensation and nerve activity in pol￾ymodal nociceptive afferents of the cat. Eur J Neurosci 1995;7(6):1154e63.
[64] Acosta MC, Belmonte C, Gallar J. Sensory experiences in humans and single￾unit activity in cats evoked by polymodal stimulation of the cornea. J Physiol
2001;534(Pt. 2):511e25.
[65] Chen X, Belmonte C, Rang HP. Capsaicin and carbon dioxide act by distinct
mechanisms on sensory nerve terminals in the cat cornea. Pain 1997;70(1):
23e9.
[66] Chen X, Gallar J, Belmonte C. Reduction by antiinflammatory drugs of the
response of corneal sensory nerve fibers to chemical irritation. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 1997;38(10):1944e53.
[67] Parra A, Gonzalez-Gonzalez O, Gallar J, Belmonte C. Tear fluid hyper￾osmolality increases nerve impulse activity of cold thermoreceptor endings
of the cornea. Pain 2014;155(8):1481e91.
[68] Acosta MC, Luna C, Quirce S, Belmonte C, Gallar J. Changes in sensory activity
of ocular surface sensory nerves during allergic keratoconjunctivitis. Pain
2013;154(11):2353e62.
[69] Caterina MJ, Schumacher MA, Tominaga M, Rosen TA, Levine JD, Julius D. The
capsaicin receptor: a heat-activated ion channel in the pain pathway. Nature
1997;389(6653):816e24.
[70] Tominaga M, Caterina MJ, Malmberg AB, Rosen TA, Gilbert H, Skinner K, et al.
The cloned capsaicin receptor integrates multiple pain-producing stimuli.
Neuron 1998;21(3):531e43.
[71] Davis JB, Gray J, Gunthorpe MJ, Hatcher JP, Davey PT, Overend P, et al.
Vanilloid receptor-1 is essential for inflammatory thermal hyperalgesia.
Nature 2000;405(6783):183e7.
[72] Straub RH. TRPV1, TRPA1, and TRPM8 channels in inflammation, energy
redirection, and water retention: role in chronic inflammatory diseases with
an evolutionary perspective. J Mol Med 2014;92(9):925e37.
[73] Gover TD, Kao JP, Weinreich D. Calcium signaling in single peripheral sen￾sory nerve terminals. J Neurosci 2003;23(12):4793e7.
[74] Dupuy B, Thompson H, Beuerman RW. Capsiacin: a psycophysical tool to
stduy corneal sensitivity. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1988;29(Supp.):454.
[75] Zollman TM, Bragg RM, Harrison DA. Clinical effects of oleoresin capsicum
(pepper spray) on the human cornea and conjunctiva. Ophthalmology
2000;107(12):2186e9.
[76] Immke DC, Gavva NR. The TRPV1 receptor and nociception. Semin Cell Dev
Biol 2006;17(5):582e91.
[77] Guo A, Vulchanova L, Wang J, Li X, Elde R. Immunocytochemical localization
of the vanilloid receptor 1 (VR1): relationship to neuropeptides, the P2X3
purinoceptor and IB4 binding sites. Eur J Neurosci 1999;11(3):946e58.
[78] Murata Y, Masuko S. Peripheral and central distribution of TRPV1, substance
P and CGRP of rat corneal neurons. Brain Res 2006;1085(1):87e94.
[79] Hirata H, Fried N, Oshinsky ML. Quantitative characterization reveals three
types of dry-sensitive corneal afferents: pattern of discharge, receptive field,
and thermal and chemical sensitivity. J Neurophysiol 2012;108(9):2481e93.
[80] Mergler S, Valtink M, Takayoshi S, Okada Y, Miyajima M, Saika S, et al.
Temperature-sensitive transient receptor potential channels in corneal tis￾sue layers and cells. Ophthalmic Res 2014;52(3):151e9.
[81] Bandell M, Story GM, Hwang SW, Viswanath V, Eid SR, Petrus MJ, et al.
Noxious cold ion channel TRPA1 is activated by pungent compounds and
bradykinin. Neuron 2004;41(6):849e57.
[82] Bautista DM, Pellegrino M, Tsunozaki M. TRPA1: a gatekeeper for inflam￾mation. Annu Rev Physiol 2013;75:181e200.
[83] Katagiri A, Thompson R, Rahman M, Okamoto K, Bereiter DA. Evidence for
TRPA1 involvement in central neural mechanisms in a rat model of dry eye.
Neuroscience 2015;290:204e13.
[84] Mantelli F, Micera A, Sacchetti M, Bonini S. Neurogenic inflammation of the
ocular surface. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;10(5):498e504.
[85] Reid TW, Murphy CJ, Iwahashi CK, Foster BA, Mannis MJ. Stimulation of
epithelial cell growth by the neuropeptide substance P. J Cell Biochem
1993;52(4):476e85.
[86] Garcia-Hirschfeld J, Lopez-Briones LG, Belmonte C. Neurotrophic influences
on corneal epithelial cells. Exp Eye Res 1994;59(5):597e605.
[87] Tran MT, Ritchie MH, Lausch RN, Oakes JE. Calcitonin gene-related peptide
induces IL-8 synthesis in human corneal epithelial cells. J Immunol
2000;164(8):4307e12.
[88] Tran MT, Lausch RN, Oakes JE. Substance P differentially stimulates IL-8
synthesis in human corneal epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2000;41(12):3871e7.
[89] Malin SA, Molliver DC, Koerber HR, Cornuet P, Frye R, Albers KM, et al. Glial
cell line-derived neurotrophic factor family members sensitize nociceptors
in vitro and produce thermal hyperalgesia in vivo. J Neurosci 2006;26(33):
8588e99.
[90] Elitt CM, McIlwrath SL, Lawson JJ, Malin SA, Molliver DC, Cornuet PK, et al.
Artemin overexpression in skin enhances expression of TRPV1 and TRPA1 in
cutaneous sensory neurons and leads to behavioral sensitivity to heat and
cold. J Neurosci 2006;26(33):8578e87.
[91] Malin SA, Davis BM. Postnatal roles of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor family members in nociceptors plasticity. Sheng li xue bao. Acta
Physiol Sin 2008;60:571e8.
[92] Elitt CM, Malin SA, Koerber HR, Davis BM, Albers KM. Overexpression of
artemin in the tongue increases expression of TRPV1 and TRPA1 in trigem￾inal afferents and causes oral sensitivity to capsaicin and mustard oil. Brain
Res 2008;1230:80e90.
[93] Tanelian DL, Beuerman RW. Responses of rabbit corneal nociceptors to
mechanical and thermal stimulation. Exp Neurol 1984;84(1):165e78.
[94] Carr RW, Pianova S, Fernandez J, Fallon JB, Belmonte C, Brock JA. Effects of
heating and cooling on nerve terminal impulses recorded from cold-sensi￾tive receptors in the guinea-pig cornea. J Gen Physiol 2003;121(5):427e39.
[95] Brock J, Acosta MC, Al Abed A, Pianova S, Belmonte C. Barium ions inhibit the
dynamic response of guinea-pig corneal cold receptors to heating but not to
cooling. J Physiol 2006;575(Pt 2):573e81.
[96] Gonzalez-Gonz alez O, Bech F, Gallar J, Merayo-Lloves J, Belmonte C. Func- 
tional properties of sensory nerve terminals of the mouse cornea. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2017;58(1):404e15.
[97] Hirata H, Meng ID. Cold-sensitive corneal afferents respond to a variety of
ocular stimuli central to tear production: implications for dry eye disease.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51(8):3969e76.
[98] Parra A, Madrid R, Echevarria D, del Olmo S, Morenilla-Palao C, Acosta MC,
et al. Ocular surface wetness is regulated by TRPM8-dependent cold ther￾moreceptors of the cornea. Nat Med 2010;16(12):1396e9.
[99] Acosta MC, Tan ME, Belmonte C, Gallar J. Sensations evoked by selective
mechanical, chemical, and thermal stimulation of the conjunctiva and
cornea. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42(9):2063e7.
[100] Kurose M, Meng ID. Corneal dry-responsive neurons in the spinal trigeminal
nucleus respond to innocuous cooling in the rat. J Neurophysiol
2013;109(10):2517e22.
[101] Quallo T, Vastani N, Horridge E, Gentry C, Parra A, Moss S, et al. TRPM8 is a
neuronal osmosensor that regulates eye blinking in mice. Nat Commun
2015;6:7150.
[102] Hirata H, Rosenblatt MI. Hyperosmolar tears enhance cooling sensitivity of
the corneal nerves in rats: possible neural basis for cold-induced dry eye
pain. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55(9):5821e33.
[103] Hirata H, Mizerska K, Marfurt CF, Rosenblatt MI. Hyperosmolar tears induce
functional and structural alterations of corneal nerves: electrophysiological
and anatomical evidence toward neurotoxicity. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2015;56:8125e40.
[104] Hirata H, Oshinsky ML. Ocular dryness excites two classes of corneal afferent
neurons implicated in basal tearing in rats: involvement of transient re￾ceptor potential channels. J Neurophysiol 2012;107(4):1199e209.
[105] Olivares E, Salgado S, Maidana JP, Herrera G, Campos M, Madrid R, et al.
TRPM8-Dependent dynamic response in a mathematical model of cold
thermoreceptor. PLoS One 2015;10:e0139314.
[106] McKemy DD, Neuhausser WM, Julius D. Identification of a cold receptor
reveals a general role for TRP channels in thermosensation. Nature
2002;416(6876):52e8.
[107] Peier AM, Moqrich A, Hergarden AC, Reeve AJ, Andersson DA, Story GM, et al.
A TRP channel that senses cold stimuli and menthol. Cell 2002;108(5):
705e15.
[108] Knowlton WM, Palkar R, Lippoldt EK, McCoy DD, Baluch F, Chen J, et al.
A sensory-labeled line for cold: TRPM8-expressing sensory neurons define
the cellular basis for cold, cold pain, and cooling-mediated analgesia. J
Neurosci 2013;33(7):2837e48.
[109] Orio P, Parra A, Madrid R, Gonzalez O, Belmonte C, Viana F. Role of Ih in the 
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 429
firing pattern of mammalian cold thermoreceptor endings. J Neurophysiol
2012;108(11):3009e23.
[110] Gonzalez-Gonzalez O, Bech F, Gallar J, Merayo-Lloves J, Belmonte C. Func￾tional properties of sensory nerve terminals of the mouse cornea. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2017;58(1):404e15.
[111] Madrid R, de la Pena E, Donovan-Rodriguez T, Belmonte C, Viana F. Variable ~
threshold of trigeminal cold-thermosensitive neurons is determined by a
balance between TRPM8 and Kv1 potassium channels. J Neurosci
2009;29(10):3120e31.
[112] Viana F, de la Pena E, Belmonte C. Speci ~ ficity of cold thermotransduction is
determined by differential ionic channel expression. Nat Neurosci 2002;5(3):
254e60.
[113] Coste B, Mathur J, Schmidt M, Earley TJ, Ranade S, Petrus MJ, et al. Piezo1 and
Piezo2 are essential components of distinct mechanically activated cation
channels. Science 2010;330(6000):55e60.
[114] Coste B, Xiao B, Santos JS, Syeda R, Grandl J, Spencer KS, et al. Piezo proteins
are pore-forming subunits of mechanically activated channels. Nature
2012;483(7388):176e81.
[115] Kim SE, Coste B, Chadha A, Cook B, Patapoutian A. The role of Drosophila
Piezo in mechanical nociception. Nature 2012;483(7388):209e12.
[116] Acosta MC, Luna C, Quirce S, Belmonte C, Gallar J. Corneal sensory nerve
activity in an experimental model of UV keratitis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2014;55(6):3403e12.
[117] Michaelis M, Habler HJ, J € aenig W. Silent afferents: a separate class of primary €
afferents? Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1996;23(2):99e105.
[118] Brock James A, McLachlan Elspeth M, Belmonte Carlos. Tetrodotoxin-resis￾tant impulses in single nociceptor nerve terminals in Guinea-pig cornea. J
Physiol 1998;512(1):211e7.
[119] Oppenheimer DR, Palmer E, Weddell G. Nerve endings in the conjunctiva. J
Anat 1958;92:321e52.
[120] Munger BL, Halata Z. The sensorineural apparatus of the human eyelid. Am J
Anat 1984;170(2):181e204.
[121] Luhtala J, Palkama A, Uusitalo H. Calcitonin gene-related peptide immuno￾reactive nerve fibers in the rat conjunctiva. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
1991;32(3):640e5.
[122] Luhtala J, Uusitalo H. The distribution and origin of substance P immuno￾reactive nerve fibres in the rat conjunctiva. Exp Eye Res 1991;53(5):641e6.
[123] Elsås T, Edvinsson L, Sundler F, Uddman R. Neuronal pathways to the rat
conjunctiva revealed by retrograde tracing and immunocytochemistry. Exp
Eye Res 1994;58(1):117e26.
[124] Dartt DA, McCarthy DM, Mercer HJ, Kessler TL, Chung EH, Zieske JD. Local￾ization of nerves adjacent to goblet cells in rat conjunctiva. Curr Eye Res
1995;14(11):993e1000.
[125] Chung CW, Tigges M, Stone RA. Peptidergic innervation of the primate
meibomian gland. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1996;37(1):238e45.
[126] Lawrenson JG, Ruskell GL. The structure of corpuscular nerve endings in the
limbal conjunctiva of the human eye. J Anat 1991;177:75e84.
[127] Lowther GE, Hill RM. Sensitivity threshold of the lower lid margin in the
course of adaptation to contact lenses. Am J Optom Arch Am Acad Optom
1968;45(9):587e94.
[128] Aracil A, Gallar J, Belmonte C. Functional properties of the conjunctival
innervation. Opthalmic Res 2001;33(Suppl. 1):101.
[129] Stapleton F, Tan ME, Papas EB, Ehrmann K, Golebiowski B, Vega J, et al.
Corneal and conjunctival sensitivity to air stimuli. Br J Ophthalmol
2004;88(12):1547e51.
[130] Acosta MC, Alfaro ML, Borras F, Belmonte C, Gallar J. Influence of age, gender
and iris color on mechanical and chemical sensitivity of the cornea and
conjunctiva. Exp Eye Res 2006;83(4):932e8.
[131] Belmonte C, ed la Pena E. Thermosensation. In: Galizia GCG, Lledo PM, edi￾tors. Neurosciences. Berlin, Germany: Springer Verlag; 2013. p. 303e19.
[132] Xiao B, Wang Y, Reinach PS, Ren Y, Li J, Hua S, et al. Dynamic ocular surface
and lacrimal gland changes induced in experimental murine dry eye. PLoS
One 2015;10:e0115333.
[133] Belmonte C, Gallar J. Cold thermoreceptors, unexpected players in tear
production and ocular dryness sensations. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2011;52(6):3888e92.
[134] Kimball SH, King-Smith PE, Nichols JJ. Evidence for the major contribution of
evaporation to tear film thinning between blinks. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2010;51(12):6294e7.
[135] Purslow C, Wolffsohn J. The relation between physical properties of the
anterior eye and ocular surface temperature. Optom Vis Sci 2007;84(3):
197e201.
[136] Li W, Graham AD, Selvin S, Lin MC. Ocular surface cooling corresponds to
tear film thinning and breakup. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92(9):e248e56.
[137] Pattmoller J, Wang J, Zemova E, Seitz B, Eppig T, Langenbucher A, et al. €
Correlation of corneal thickness, endothelial cell density and anterior
chamber depth with ocular surface temperature in normal subjects. Z Med
Phys 2015;25(3):243e50.
[138] Versura P, Giannaccare G, Fresina M, Campos EC. Subjective discomfort
symptoms are related to low corneal temperature in patients with evapo￾rative dry eye. Cornea 2015;34(9):1079e85.
[139] Belmonte C, Acosta MC, Merayo-Lloves J, Gallar J. What causes eye pain? Curr
Ophthalmol Rep 2015;3(2):111e21.
[140] Robbins A, Kurose M, Winterson BJ, Meng ID. Menthol activation of corneal
cool cells induces TRPM8-mediated lacrimation but not nociceptive
responses in rodents. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53(11):7034e42.
[141] Begley C, Simpson T, Liu H, Salvo E, Wu Z, Bradley A, et al. Quantitative
analysis of tear film fluorescence and discomfort during tear film instability
and thinning. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54(4):2645e53.
[142] Liu H, Begley C, Chen M, Bradley A, Bonanno J, McNamara NA, et al. A link
between tear instability and hyperosmolarity in dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2009;50(8):3671e9.
[143] Ordovas-Montanes J, Rakoff-Nahoum S, Huang S, Riol-Blanco L, Barreiro O,
von Andrian UH. The regulation of immunological processes by peripheral
neurons in homeostasis and disease. Trends Immunol 2015;36(10):
578e604.
[144] Hu K, Harris DL, Yamaguchi T, von Andrian UH, Hamrah P. A dual role for
corneal dendritic cells in herpes simplex keratitis: local suppression of
corneal damage and promotion of systemic viral dissemination. PLoS One
2015;10:e0137123.
[145] Streilein JW. Ocular immune privilege: therapeutic opportunities from an
experiment of nature. Nat Rev Immunol 2003;3(11):879e89.
[146] Hamrah P, Huq SO, Liu Y, Zhang Q, Dana MR. Corneal immunity is mediated
by heterogeneous population of antigen-presenting cells. J Leukoc Biol
2003;74(2):172e8.
[147] Yamaguchi T, Harris DL, Higa K, Shimazaki J, von Andrian U, Hamrah P.
Neurogenic immune homeostasis: peripheral innervation maintains avas￾cularity and immune privilege of the cornea. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2015;56:4034.
[148] Cruzat A, Witkin D, Baniasadi N, Zheng L, Ciolino JB, Jurkunas UV, et al.
Inflammation and the nervous system: the connection in the cornea in pa￾tients with infectious keratitis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(8):
5136e43.
[149] Leppin K, Behrendt AK, Reichard M, Stachs O, Guthoff RF, Baltrusch S, et al.
Diabetes mellitus leads to accumulation of dendritic cells and nerve fiber
damage of the subbasal nerve plexus in the cornea. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2014;55(6):3603e15.
[150] Blanco T, Saban DR. The cornea has “the nerve” to encourage immune
rejection. Am J Transplant 2015;15(6):1453e4.
[151] Jamali A, Lopez MJ, Sendra V, Harris DL, Hamrah P. Plasmacytoid dendritic
cells demonstrate vital neuro-protective properties in the cornea and induce
corneal nerve regeneration. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:4355.
[152] Chiu IM, von Hehn CA, Woolf CJ. Neurogenic inflammation and the periph￾eral nervous system in host defense and immunopathology. Nat Neurosci
2012;15(8):1063e7.
[153] Micera A, Lambiase A, Bonini S. The role of neuromediators in ocular allergy.
Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2008;8(5):466e71.
[154] Launay PS, Reboussin E, Liang H, Kessal K, Godefroy D, Rostene W, et al.
Ocular inflammation induces trigeminal pain, peripheral and central neu￾roinflammatory mechanisms. Neurobiol Dis 2016;88:16e28.
[155] Carucci JA, Ignatius R, Wei Y, Cypess AM, Schaer DA, Pope M, et al. Calcitonin
gene-related peptide decreases expression of HLA-DR and CD86 by human
dendritic cells and dampens dendritic cell-driven T cell-proliferative re￾sponses via the type I calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor. J Immunol
2000;164(7):3494e9.
[156] Hosoi J, Murphy GF, Egan CL, Lerner EA, Grabbe S, Asahina A, et al. Regulation
of Langerhans cell function by nerves containing calcitonin gene-related
peptide. Nature 1993;363(6425):159e63.
[157] Dunzendorfer Stefan, Kaser Arthur, Meierhofer Christian, Tilg Herbert,
Wiedermann Christian J. Cutting edge: peripheral neuropeptides attract
immature and arrest mature blood-derived dendritic cells. J Immunol
2001;166(4):2167e72.
[158] Paunicka KJ, Mellon J, Robertson D, Petroll M, Brown JR, Niederkorn JY.
Severing corneal nerves in one eye induces sympathetic loss of immune
privilege and promotes rejection of future corneal allografts placed in either
eye. Am J Transplant 2015;15(6):1490e501.
[159] Gonzalez-Coto AF, Alonso-Ron C, Alcalde I, Gallar J, Meana A, Merayo- 
Lloves J, et al. Expression of cholecystokinin, gastrin, and their receptors in
the mouse cornea. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55(3):1965e75.
[160] Verge GM, Milligan ED, Maier SF, Watkins LR, Naeve GS, Foster AC. Fractal￾kine (CX3CL1) and fractalkine receptor (CX3CR1) distribution in spinal cord
and dorsal root ganglia under basal and neuropathic pain conditions. Eur J
Neurosci 2004;20(5):1150e60.
[161] Jung S, Aliberti J, Graemmel P, Sunshine MJ, Kreutzberg GW, Sher A, et al.
Analysis of fractalkine receptor CX(3)CR1 function by targeted deletion and
green fluorescent protein reporter gene insertion. Mol Cell Biol 2000;20(11):
4106e14.
[162] Mizoue LS, Bazan JF, Johnson EC, Handel TM. Solution structure and dy￾namics of the CX3C chemokine domain of fractalkine and its interaction with
an N-terminal fragment of CX3CR1. Biochemistry 1999;38(5):1402e14.
[163] Owlasiuk P, Zajkowska JM, Pietruczuk M, Pancewicz SA, Hermanowska￾Szpakowicz T. Fractalkineestructure, functions and biological activity. Pol
Merkur Lekarski 2009;26:253e7.
[164] Clark AK, Malcangio M. Fractalkine/CX3CR1 signaling during neuropathic
pain. Front Cell Neurosci 2014;8:121.
[165] Chinnery HR, Ruitenberg MJ, Plant GW, Pearlman E, Jung S, McMenamin PG.
The chemokine receptor CX3CR1 mediates homing of MHC class II-positive
cells to the normal mouse corneal epithelium. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2007;48(4):1568e74.
[166] Carreno E, Enríquez-de-Salamanca A, Tes ~ on M, García-V azquez C, Stern ME,
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 430
Whitcup SM, et al. Cytokine and chemokine levels in tears from healthy
subjects. Acta Ophthalmol 2010;88(7):e250e8.
[167] Li Z, Burns AR, Han L, Rumbaut RE, Smith CW. IL-17 and VEGF are necessary
for efficient corneal nerve regeneration. Am J Pathol 2011;178(3):1106e16.
[168] Dahan A, Brines M, Niesters M, Cerami A, van Velzen M. Targeting the innate
repair receptor to treat neuropathy. PAIN Rep 2016;1:e566.
[169] Hamrah P, Dana R. Antigen-presenting cells in the eye and ocular surface. In:
Dart DA, editor. Encyclopedia of the Eye. Oxford: Academic Press; 2010.
p. 120e7.
[170] Sarkar J, Chaudhary S, Jassim SH, Ozturk O, Chamon W, Ganesh B, et al.
CD11bþGR1þ myeloid cells secrete NGF and promote trigeminal ganglion
neurite growth: implications for corneal nerve regeneration. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2013;54(9):5920e36.
[171] Okuno T, Nakatsuji Y, Kumanogoh A. The role of immune semaphorins in
multiple sclerosis. FEBS Lett 2011;585(23):3829e35.
[172] Takamatsu H, Kumanogoh A. Diverse roles for semaphorin-plexin signaling
in the immune system. Trends Immunol 2012;33(3):127e35.
[173] Guttmann-Raviv N, Shraga-Heled N, Varshavsky A, Guimaraes-Sternberg C,
Kessler O, Neufeld G. Semaphorin-3A and semaphorin-3F work together to
repel endothelial cells and to inhibit their survival by induction of apoptosis.
J Biol Chem 2007;282(36):26294e305.
[174] Goto T, Oh SB, Takeda M, Shinoda M, Sato T, Gunjikake KK, et al. Recent
advances in basic research on the trigeminal ganglion. J Physiol Sci
2016;66(5):381e6.
[175] Grace PM, Hutchinson MR, Maier SF, Watkins LR. Pathological pain and the
neuroimmune interface. Nat Rev Immunol 2014;14(4):217e31.
[176] Marfurt CF. The central projections of trigeminal primary afferent neurons in
the cat as determined by the tranganglionic transport of horseradish
peroxidase. J Comp Neurol 1981;203(4):785e98.
[177] Panneton WM, Burton H. Corneal and periocular representation within the
trigeminal sensory complex in the cat studied with transganglionic transport
of horseradish peroxidase. J Comp Neurol 1981;199(3):327e44.
[178] Marfurt CF, Del Toro DR. Corneal sensory pathway in the rat: a horseradish
peroxidase tracing study. J Comp Neurol 1987;261(3):450e9.
[179] Marfurt CF, Echtenkamp SF. Central projections and trigeminal ganglion
location of corneal afferent neurons in the monkey, Macaca fascicularis. J
Comp Neurol 1988;272(3):370e82.
[180] Panneton WM, Hsu H, Gan Q. Distinct central representations for sensory
fibers innervating either the conjunctiva or cornea of the rat. Exp Eye Res
2010;90(3):388e96.
[181] Bereiter DA, Hargreaves KM, Hu JW. Trigeminal mechanisms of nociception:
peripheral and brainstem organization. In: Basbaum A, Bushnell MC, editors.
Science of Pain. New York: Elsevier; 2009. p. 435e60.
[182] Gong S, Zhou Q, LeDoux MS. Blink-related sensorimotor anatomy in the rat.
Anat Embryol 2003;207(3):193e208.
[183] Simons E, Smith PG. Sensory and autonomic innervation of the rat eyelid:
neuronal origins and peptide phenotypes. J Chem Neuroanat 1994;7(1e2):
35e47.
[184] Baljet B, VanderWerf F. Connections between the lacrimal gland and sensory
trigeminal neurons: a WGA/HRP study in the cynomolgous monkey. J Anat
2005;206(3):257e63.
[185] Kirch W, Horneber M, Tamm ER. Characterization of Meibomian gland
innervation in the cynomolgus monkey (Macaca fascicularis). Anat Embryol
1996;193(4):365e75.
[186] Bereiter DA, Hirata H, Hu JW. Trigeminal subnucleus caudalis: beyond ho￾mologies with the spinal dorsal horn. Pain 2000;88(3):221e4.
[187] Meng ID, Hu JW, Benetti AP, Bereiter DA. Encoding of corneal input in two
distinct regions of the spinal trigeminal nucleus in the rat: cutaneous
receptive field properties, responses to thermal and chemical stimulation,
modulation by diffuse noxious inhibitory controls, and projections to the
parabrachial area. J Neurophysiol 1997;77(1):43e56.
[188] Hirata H, Hu JW, Bereiter DA. Responses of medullary dorsal horn neurons to
corneal stimulation by CO(2) pulses in the rat. J Neurophysiol 1999;82(5):
2092e107.
[189] Okamoto K, Tashiro A, Chang Z, Bereiter DA. Bright light activates a tri￾geminal nociceptive pathway. Pain 2010;149(2):235e42.
[190] Hirata H, Okamoto K, Tashiro A, Bereiter DA. A novel class of neurons at the
trigeminal subnucleus interpolaris/caudalis transition region monitors
ocular surface fluid status and modulates tear production. J Neurosci
2004;24(17):4224e32.
[191] Pozo MA, Cervero F. Neurons in the rat spinal trigeminal complex driven by
corneal nociceptors: receptive-field properties and effects of noxious stim￾ulation of the cornea. J Neurophysiol 1993;70(6):2370e8.
[192] Meng ID, Hu JW, Bereiter DA. Differential effects of morphine on corneal￾responsive neurons in rostral versus caudal regions of spinal trigeminal
nucleus in the rat. J Neurophysiol 1998;79(5):2593e602.
[193] Pellegrini JJ, Horn AK, Evinger C. The trigeminally evoked blink reflex. I.
Neuronal circuits. Exp Brain Res 1995;107(2):166e80.
[194] Hirata H, Takeshita S, Hu JW, Bereiter DA. Cornea-responsive medullary
dorsal horn neurons: modulation by local opioids and projections to thal￾amus and brain stem. J Neurophysiol 2000;84(2):1050e61.
[195] Okamoto K, Tashiro A, Thompson R, Nishida Y, Bereiter DA. Trigeminal
interpolaris/caudalis transition neurons mediate reflex lacrimation evoked
by bright light in the rat. Eur J Neurosci 2012;36(11):3492e9.
[196] Rahman M, Okamoto K, Thompson R, Bereiter DA. Trigeminal pathways for
hypertonic saline- and light-evoked corneal reflexes. Neuroscience
2014;277:716e23.
[197] Carstens E, Kuenzler N, Handwerker HO. Activation of neurons in rat tri￾geminal subnucleus caudalis by different irritant chemicals applied to oral or
ocular mucosa. J Neurophysiol 1998;80(2):465e92.
[198] Bereiter DA, Okamoto K, Tashiro A, Hirata H. Endotoxin-induced uveitis
causes long-term changes in trigeminal subnucleus caudalis neurons. J
Neurophysiol 2005;94(6):3815e25.
[199] Ebersberger A, Ringkamp M, Reeh PW, Handwerker HO. Recordings from
brain stem neurons responding to chemical stimulation of the subarachnoid
space. J Neurophysiol 1997;77(6):3122e33.
[200] Schepelmann K, Ebersberger A, Pawlak M, Oppmann M, Messlinger K.
Response properties of trigeminal brain stem neurons with input from dura
mater encephali in the rat. Neuroscience 1999;90(2):543e54.
[201] Malick A, Strassman RM, Burstein R. Trigeminohypothalamic and retic￾ulohypothalamic tract neurons in the upper cervical spinal cord and caudal
medulla of the rat. J Neurophysiol 2000;84(4):2078e112.
[202] Kerr FW, Kruger L, Schwassmann HO, Stern R. Somatotopic organization of
mechanoreceptor units in the trigeminal nuclear complex of the macaque. J
Comp Neurol 1968;134(2):127e44.
[203] Greenwood LF, Sessle BJ. Inputs to trigeminal brain stem neurones from
facial, oral, tooth pulp and pharyngolaryngeal tissues: II. Role of trigeminal
nucleus caudalis in modulating responses to innocuous and noxious stimuli.
Brain Res 1976;117(2):227e38.
[204] Davis KD, Dostrovsky JO. Responses of feline trigeminal spinal tract nucleus
neurons to stimulation of the middle meningeal artery and sagittal sinus. J
Neurophysiol 1988;59(2):648e66.
[205] Chen WH, Chui C, Lin HS, Yin HL. Salt-and-pepper eye pain and brainstem
stroke. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2012;114(7):972e5.
[206] Jacquin MF, Chiaia NL, Haring JH, Rhoades RW. Intersubnuclear connections
within the rat trigeminal brainstem complex. Somatosens Mot Res
1990;7(4):399e420.
[207] Voisin DL, Domejean-Orliaguet S, Chalus M, Dallel R, Woda A. Ascending 
connections from the caudal part to the oral part of the spinal trigeminal
nucleus in the rat. Neuroscience 2002;109(1):183e93.
[208] Hirata H, Okamoto K, Bereiter DA. GABA(A) receptor activation modulates
corneal unit activity in rostral and caudal portions of trigeminal subnucleus
caudalis. J Neurophysiol 2003;90(5):2837e49.
[209] Warren S, May PJ. Morphology and connections of intratrigeminal cells and
axons in the macaque monkey. Front Neuroanat 2013;7:11.
[210] Chiang CY, Hu B, Hu JW, Dostrovsky JO, Sessle BJ. Central sensitization of
nociceptive neurons in trigeminal subnucleus oralis depends on integrity of
subnucleus caudalis. J Neurophysiol 2002;88(1):256e64.
[211] Davis KD, Dostrovsky JO. Effect of trigeminal subnucleus caudalis cold block
on the cerebrovascular-evoked responses of rostral trigeminal complex
neurons. Neurosci Lett 1988;94(3):303e8.
[212] Henriquez VM, Evinger C. The three-neuron corneal reflex circuit and
modulation of second-order corneal responsive neurons. Exp Brain Res
2007;179(4):691e702.
[213] Kaas JH, Nelson RJ, Sur M, Dykes RW, Merzenich MM. The somatotopic or￾ganization of the ventroposterior thalamus of the squirrel monkey, Saimiri
sciureus. J Comp Neurol 1984;226(1):111e40.
[214] Rausell E, Jones EG. Chemically distinct compartments of the thalamic VPM
nucleus in monkeys relay principal and spinal trigeminal pathways to
different layers of the somatosensory cortex. J Neurosci 1991;11(1):226e37.
[215] Noseda R, Monconduit L, Constandil L, Chalus M, Villanueva L. Central ner￾vous system networks involved in the processing of meningeal and cuta￾neous inputs from the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve in the rat.
Cephalalgia 2008;28(8):813e24.
[216] Aicher SA, Hermes SM, Hegarty DM. Corneal afferents differentially target
thalamic- and parabrachial-projecting neurons in spinal trigeminal nucleus
caudalis. Neuroscience 2013;232:182e93.
[217] Bernard JF, Bester H, Besson JM. Involvement of the spino-parabrachio
-amygdaloid and -hypothalamic pathways in the autonomic and affective
emotional aspects of pain. Prog Brain Res 1996;107:243e55.
[218] Gauriau C, Bernard JF. A comparative reappraisal of projections from the
superficial laminae of the dorsal horn in the rat: the forebrain. J Comp Neurol
2004;468(1):24e56.
[219] Mazzola L, Isnard J, Mauguiere F. Somatosensory and pain responses to 
stimulation of the second somatosensory area (SII) in humans. A comparison
with SI and insular responses. Cereb Cortex 2006;16(7):960e8.
[220] Penfield W, Boldrey E. Somatic motor and snsory representation in the ce￾rebral cortex of man as studied by electrical stimulation. Brain 1937;60:
389e443.
[221] Dreyer DA, Loe PR, Metz CB, Whitsel BL. Representation of head and face in
postcentral gyrus of the macaque. J Neurophysiol 1975;38(3):714e33.
[222] Nelson RJ, Sur M, Felleman DJ, Kaas JH. Representations of the body surface
in postcentral parietal cortex of Macaca fascicularis. J Comp Neurol
1980;192(4):611e43.
[223] Moulton EA, Becerra L, Rosenthal P, Borsook D. An approach to localizing
corneal pain representation in human primary somatosensory cortex. PLoS
One 2012;7:e44643.
[224] Morrison M, Allen PZ. Lactoperoxidase: identification and isolation from
Harderian and lacrimal glands. Science 1966;152(3729):1626e8.
[225] Allen PZ, Morrison M. Lactoperoxidase. VI. Immunochemical studies on
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 431
lactoperoxidase from the milk of several species. Arch Biochem Biophys
1966;113(3):540e7.
[226] Broekhuyse RM. Lactoferrin and the protective function of the lacrimal fluid.
Ophthalmologica 1976;173(3e4):268e70.
[227] Franklin RM, Prendergast RA, Silverstein AM. Secretory immune system of
rabbit ocular adnexa. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1979;18(10):1093e6.
[228] Rennie IG, Parsons MA. Lysozyme distribution in human lacrimal glands and
other ocular adnexa. Arch Ophthalmol 1981;99(10):1850e3.
[229] Delaire A, Lassagne H, Gachon AM. New members of the lipocalin family in
human tear fluid. Exp Eye Res 1992;55(4):645e7.
[230] Putney Jr JW, VandeWalle CM, Leslie BA. Stimulus-secretion coupling in the
rat lacrimal gland. Am J Physiol 1978;235(5):C188e98.
[231] Marty A, Tan YP, Trautmann A. Three types of calcium-dependent channel in
rat lacrimal glands. J Physiol 1984;357:293e325.
[232] Trautmann A, Marty A. Activation of Ca-dependent K channels by carba￾moylcholine in rat lacrimal glands. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984;81(2):
611e5.
[233] Wood RL, Mircheff AK. Apical and basal-lateral Na/K-ATPase in rat lacrimal
gland acinar cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1986;27(8):1293e6.
[234] Alexander JH, van Lennep EW, Young JA. Water and electrolyte secretion by
the exorbital lacrimal gland of the rat studied by micropuncture and cath￾eterization techniques. Pflugers Arch 1972;337(4):299e309.
[235] Alexander JH, Young JA, van Lennep EW. The ultrastructure of the duct
system in the rat extraorbital lacrimal gland. Z Zellforsch Mikrosk Anat
1973;144(4):453e66.
[236] Nikkinen A, Lehtosalo JI, Uusitalo H, Palkama A, Panula P. The lacrimal glands
of the rat and the Guinea pig are innervated by nerve fibers containing
immunoreactivities for substance P and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide.
Histochemistry 1984;81(1):23e7.
[237] Dartt DA, Baker AK, Vaillant C, Rose PE. Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
stimulation of protein secretion from rat lacrimal gland acini. Am J Physiol
1984;247(5 Pt 1):G502e9.
[238] Sibony PA, Walcott B, McKeon C, Jakobiec FA. Vasoactive intestinal poly￾peptide and the innervation of the human lacrimal gland. Arch Ophthalmol
1988;106(8):1085e8.
[239] Matsumoto Y, Tanabe T, Ueda S, Kawata M. Immunohistochemical and
enzymehistochemical studies of peptidergic, aminergic and cholinergic
innervation of the lacrimal gland of the monkey (Macaca fuscata). J Auton
Nerv Syst 1992;37(3):207e14.
[240] Seifert P, Spitznas M. Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) innervation of
the human eyelid glands. Exp Eye Res 1999;68(6):685e92.
[241] Ríos JD, Horikawa Y, Chen LL, Kublin CL, Hodges RR, Dartt DA, et al. Age￾dependent alterations in mouse exorbital lacrimal gland structure, inner￾vation and secretory response. Exp Eye Res 2005;80(4):477e91.
[242] Ding C, Walcott B, Keyser KT. Neuronal nitric oxide synthase and the auto￾nomic innervation of the mouse lacrimal gland. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2001;42(12):2789e94.
[243] Ding C, Walcott B, Keyser KT. Sympathetic neural control of the mouse
lacrimal gland. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44(4):1513e20.
[244] Dartt DA, Botelho SY. Protein in rabbit lacrimal gland fluid. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 1979;18(11):1207e9.
[245] Dartt DA, Knox I, Palau A, Botelho SY. Proteins in fluids from individual
orbital glands and in tears. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1980;19(11):1342e7.
[246] Dartt DA, Møller M, Poulsen JH. Lacrimal gland electrolyte and water
secretion in the rabbit: localization and role of (Naþ þ Kþ)-activated ATPase.
J Physiol 1981;321:557e69.
[247] Ubels JL, Foley KM, Rismondo V. Retinol secretion by the lacrimal gland.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1986;27(8):1261e8.
[248] Rismondo V, Ubels JL. Isotretinoin in lacrimal gland fluid and tears. Arch
Ophthalmol 1987;105(3):416e20.
[249] Ruskell GL. Changes in nerve terminals and acini of the lacrimal gland and
changes in secretion induced by autonomic denervation. Z Zellforsch Mik￾rosk Anat 1969;94(2):261e81.
[250] Toshida H, Nguyen DH, Beuerman RW, Murakami A. Evaluation of novel dry
eye model: preganglionic parasympathetic denervation in rabbit. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48(10):4468e75.
[251] Thorig L, van Haeringen NJ, Wijngaards G. Comparison of enzymes of tears, €
lacrimal gland fluid and lacrimal gland tissue in the rat. Exp Eye Res
1984;38(6):605e9.
[252] Dursun D, Wang M, Monroy D, Li DQ, Lokeshwar BL, Stern ME, et al. A mouse
model of keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002;43(3):
632e8.
[253] Mauduit P, Jammes H, Rossignol B. M3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor
coupling to PLC in rat exorbital lacrimal acinar cells. Am J Physiol 1993;264(6
Pt 1):C1550e60.
[254] Nakamura M, Tada Y, Akaishi T, Nakata K. M3 muscarinic receptor mediates
regulation of protein secretion in rabbit lacrimal gland. Curr Eye Res
1997;16(6):614e9.
[255] Lemullois Michel, Rossignol Bernard, Mauduit Philippe. Immunolocalization
of myoepithelial cells in isolated acini of rat exorbital lacrimal gland: cellular
distribution of muscarinic receptors. Biol Cell 1996;86(2e3):175e81.
[256] Ubels JL, Hoffman HM, Srikanth S, Resau JH, Webb CP. Gene expression in rat
lacrimal gland duct cells collected using laser capture microdissection: evi￾dence for Kþ secretion by duct cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:
1876e85.
[257] Kelleher RS, Hann LE, Edwards JA, Sullivan DA. Endocrine, neural, and im￾mune control of secretory component output by lacrimal gland acinar cells. J
Immunol 1991;146:3405e12.
[258] Lambert RW, Kelleher RS, Wickham LA, Vaerman JP, Sullivan DA. Neuro￾endocrinimmune modulation of secretory component production by rat
lacrimal, salivary, and intestinal epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
1994;35(3):1192e201.
[259] Qian L, Wang Y, Xie J, Rose CM, Yang T, Nakamura T, et al. Biochemical
changes contributing to functional quiescence in lacrimal gland acinar cells
after chronic ex vivo exposure to a muscarinic agonist. Scand J Immunol
2003;58(5):550e65.
[260] Gierow JP, Lambert RW, Mircheff AK. Fluid phase endocytosis by isolated
rabbit lacrimal gland acinar cells. Exp Eye Res 1995;60(5):511e25.
[261] Adeghate EA, Singh J, Howarth FC, Burrows S. Control of porcine lacrimal
gland secretion by non-cholinergic, non-adrenergic nerves: effects of elec￾trical field stimulation, VIP and NPY. Brain Res 1997;758(1e2):127e35.
[262] Hodges RR, Zoukhri D, Sergheraert C, Zieske JD, Dartt DA. Identification of
vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor subtypes in the lacrimal gland and
their signal-transducing components. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1997;38(3):
610e9.
[263] Edman MC, Andersson SV, Delbro D, Gierow JP. Functional expression of the
adenosine A1 receptor in rabbit lacrimal gland. Exp Eye Res 2008;86(1):
110e7.
[264] Gonsalvez DG, Kerman IA, McAllen RM, Anderson CR. Chemical coding for
cardiovascular sympathetic preganglionic neurons in rats. J Neurosci
2010;30(35):11781e91.
[265] Botelho SY, Martinez EV, Pholpramool C, Prooyen HC, Janssen JT, De Palau A.
Modification of stimulated lacrimal gland flow by sympathetic nerve im￾pulses in rabbit. Am J Physiol 1976;230(1):80e4.
[266] Parod RJ, Putney Jr JW. An alpha-adrenergic receptor mechanism controlling
potassium permeability in the rat lacrimal gland acinar cell. J Physiol
1978;281:359e69.
[267] Parod RJ, Putney Jr JW. Stimulus-permeability coupling in rat lacrimal gland.
Am J Physiol 1980;239(2):G106e13.
[268] Hodges RR, Shatos MA, Tarko RS, Vrouvlianis J, Gu J, Dartt DA. Nitric oxide
and cGMP mediate alpha1D-adrenergic receptor-stimulated protein secre￾tion and p42/p44 MAPK activation in rat lacrimal gland. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2005;46(8):2781e9.
[269] Ding C, Walcott B, Keyser KT. The alpha1- and beta1-adrenergic modulation
of lacrimal gland function in the mouse. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2007;48(4):1504e10.
[270] Meneray MA, Bennett DJ, Nguyen DH, Beuerman RW. Effect of sensory
denervation on the structure and physiologic responsiveness of rabbit
lacrimal gland. Cornea 1998;17(1):99e107.
[271] Hodges RR, Vrouvlianis J, Shatos MA, Dartt DA. Characterization of P2X7
purinergic receptors and their function in rat lacrimal gland. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2009;50(12):5681e9.
[272] Hodges RR, Vrouvlianis J, Scott R, Dartt DA. Identification of P2X and P2X
purinergic receptors activated by ATP in rat lacrimal gland. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(6):3254e63.
[273] Dartt DA, Hodges RR. Cholinergic agonists activate P2X7 receptors to stim￾ulate protein secretion by the rat lacrimal gland. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2011;52(6):3381e90.
[274] Dartt DA, Hodges RR. Interaction of alpha1D-adrenergic and P2X(7) re￾ceptors in the rat lacrimal gland and the effect on intracellular [Ca2þ] and
protein secretion. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:5720e9.
[275] Ubels JL, Gipson IK, Spurr-Michaud SJ, Tisdale AS, Van Dyken RE, Hatton MP.
Gene expression in human accessory lacrimal glands of Wolfring. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53(11):6738e47.
[276] Seifert P, Spitznas M, Koch F, Cusumano A. Light and electron microscopic
morphology of accessory lacrimal glands. Adv Exp Med Biol 1994;350:
19e23.
[277] Seifert P, Spitznas M. Immunocytochemical and ultrastructural evaluation of
the distribution of nervous tissue and neuropeptides in the meibomian
gland. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1996;234(10):648e56.
[278] Montagna William, Ellis Richard A. Cholinergic innervation of the meibo￾mian glands. Anat Rec 1959;135(2):121e7.
[279] Leeson TS. Tarsal (meibomian) glands of the rat. Br J Ophthalmol 1963;47:
222e31.
[280] Uddman R, Alumets J, Ehinger B, Håkanson R, Loren I, Sundler F. Vasoactive 
intestinal peptide nerves in ocular and orbital structures of the cat. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1980;19(8):878e85.
[281] Aisa J, Lahoz M, Serrano P, Perez-Castej on MC, Junquera C, Martínez- 
Ciriano MC, et al. Acetylcholinesterase-positive and paraformaldehyde￾induced-fluorescence-positive innervation in the upper eyelid of the sheep
(Ovis aries). Histol Histopathol 2001;16(2):487e96.
[282] Miraglia T, Gomes NF. The meibomian glands of the marmoset (Callithrix
jacchus). Acta Anat 1969;74(1):104e13.
[283] Perra MT, Serra A, Sirigu P, Turno F. Histochemical demonstration of
acetylcholinesterase activity in human meibomian glands. Eur J Histochem
1996;40(1):39e44.
[284] Hartschuh W, Reinecke M, Weihe E, Yanaihara N. VIP-immunoreactivity in
the skin of various mammals: immunohistochemical, radioimmunological
and experimental evidence for a dual localization in cutaneous nerves and
merkel cells. Peptides 1984 Mar-Apr;5(2):239e45.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 432
[285] Hartschuh W, Weihe E, Reinecke M. Peptidergic (neurotensin, VIP, substance
P) nerve fibres in the skin. Immunohistochemical evidence of an involve￾ment of neuropeptides in nociception, pruritus and inflammation. Br J Der￾matol 1983;109(Suppl 25):14e7.
[286] Liu S, Li J, Tan DT, Beuerman RW. The eyelid margin: a transitional zone for 2
epithelial phenotypes. Arch Ophthalmol 2007;125(4):523e32.
[287] Zhu HY, Riau AK, Barathi VA, Chew J, Beuerman RW. Expression of neural
receptors in mouse meibomian gland. Cornea 2010;29(7):794e801.
[288] Kam WR, Sullivan DA. Neurotransmitter influence on human meibomian
gland epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52(12):8543e8.
[289] Chanthaphavong RS, Murphy SM, Anderson CR. Chemical coding of sympa￾thetic neurons controlling the tarsal muscle of the rat. Auton Neurosci
2003;105(2):77e89.
[290] Candia OA, Shi XP, Alvarez LJ. Reduction in water permeability of the rabbit
conjunctival epithelium by hypotonicity. Exp Eye Res 1998;66(5):615e24.
[291] Jumblatt MM, McKenzie RW, Jumblatt JE. MUC5AC mucin is a component of
the human precorneal tear film. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1999;40(1):43e9.
[292] Ellingham RB, Berry M, Stevenson D, Corfield AP. Secreted human conjunc￾tival mucus contains MUC5AC glycoforms. Glycobiology 1999;9(11):1181e9.
[293] Kessler TL, Mercer HJ, Zieske JD, McCarthy DM, Dartt DA. Stimulation of
goblet cell mucous secretion by activation of nerves in rat conjunctiva. Curr
Eye Res 1995;14(11):985e92.
[294] Diebold Y, Ríos JD, Hodges RR, Rawe I, Dartt DA. Presence of nerves and their
receptors in mouse and human conjunctival goblet cells. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2001;42(10):2270e82.
[295] Ríos JD, Zoukhri D, Rawe IM, Hodges RR, Zieske JD, Dartt DA. Immunoloc￾alization of muscarinic and VIP receptor subtypes and their role in stimu￾lating goblet cell secretion. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1999;40(6):1102e11.
[296] Li D, Jiao J, Shatos MA, Hodges RR, Dartt DA. Effect of VIP on intracellular
[Ca2þ], extracellular regulated kinase 1/2, and secretion in cultured rat
conjunctival goblet cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:2872e84.
[297] Jumblatt JE, Jumblatt MM. Regulation of ocular mucin secretion by P2Y2
nucleotide receptors in rabbit and human conjunctiva. Exp Eye Res
1998;67(3):341e6.
[298] Inatomi T, Spurr-Michaud S, Tisdale AS, Gipson IK. Human corneal and
conjunctival epithelia express MUC1 mucin. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
1995;36(9):1818e27.
[299] Tei M, Moccia R, Gipson IK. Developmental expression of mucin genes ASGP
(rMuc4) and rMuc5ac by the rat ocular surface epithelium. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 1999;40(9):1944e51.
[300] Argüeso P, Spurr-Michaud S, Russo CL, Tisdale A, Gipson IK. MUC16 mucin is
expressed by the human ocular surface epithelia and carries the H185 car￾bohydrate epitope. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44(6):2487e95.
[301] Spurr-Michaud S, Argüeso P, Gipson I. Assay of mucins in human tear fluid.
Exp Eye Res 2007;84(5):939e50.
[302] Pflugfelder SC, Liu Z, Monroy D, Li DQ, Carvajal ME, Price-Schiavi SA, et al.
Detection of sialomucin complex (MUC4) in human ocular surface epithe￾lium and tear fluid. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41(6):1316e26.
[303] Shi XP, Candia OA. Active sodium and chloride transport across the isolated
rabbit conjunctiva. Curr Eye Res 1995;14(10):927e35.
[304] Kompella UB, Kim KJ, Shiue MH, Lee VH. Cyclic AMP modulation of active ion
transport in the pigmented rabbit conjunctiva. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther
1996;12(3):281e7.
[305] Marfurt CF, Jones MA, Thrasher K. Parasympathetic innervation of the rat
cornea. Exp Eye Res 1998;66(4):437e48.
[306] Mertaniemi P, Ylatupa S, Partanen P, Tervo T. Increased release of immu- €
noreactive calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) in tears after excimer
laser keratectomy. Exp Eye Res 1995;60(6):659e65.
[307] Klyce SD, Beuerman RW, Crosson CE. Alteration of corneal epithelial ion
transport by sympathectomy. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1985;26(4):434e42.
[308] Hiraoka M, Shimamura M. Neural mechanisms of the corneal blinking reflex
in cats. Brain Res 1977;125(2):265e75.
[309] Manning KA, Evinger C. Different forms of blinks and their two-stage control.
Exp Brain Res 1986;64(3):579e88.
[310] Pellegrini JJ, Evinger C. The trigeminally evoked blink reflex. II. Mechanisms
of paired-stimulus suppression. Exp Brain Res 1995;107(2):181e96.
[311] Ongerboer de Visser BW. The corneal reflex: electrophysiological and
anatomical data in man. Prog Neurobiol 1980;15(1):71e83.
[312] Henriquez VM, Evinger C. Modification of cornea-evoked reflex blinks in rats.
Exp Brain Res 2005;163(4):445e56.
[313] Evinger C. A brain stem reflex in the blink of an eye. News Physiol Sci
1995;10:147e53.
[314] Evinger C, Manning KA, Sibony PA. Eyelid movements. Mechanisms and
normal data. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1991;32(2):387e400.
[315] Nakamori K, Odawara M, Nakajima T, Mizutani T, Tsubota K. Blinking is
controlled primarily by ocular surface conditions. Am J Ophthalmol
1997;124(1):24e30.
[316] Acosta MC, Gallar J, Belmonte C. The influence of eye solutions on blinking
and ocular comfort at rest and during work at video display terminals. Exp
Eye Res 1999;68(6):663e9.
[317] Wu Z, Begley CG, Situ P, Simpson T, Liu H. The effects of mild ocular surface
stimulation and concentration on spontaneous blink parameters. Curr Eye
Res 2014;39(1):9e20.
[318] Wu Z, Begley CG, Situ P, Simpson T. The effects of increasing ocular surface
stimulation on blinking and sensation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55(3):
1555e63.
[319] Naase T, Doughty MJ, Button NF. An assessment of the pattern of sponta￾neous eyeblink activity under the influence of topical ocular anaesthesia.
Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2005;243(4):306e12.
[320] Schlote T, Kadner G, Freudenthaler N. Marked reduction and distinct pat￾terns of eye blinking in patients with moderately dry eyes during video
display terminal use. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2004;242(4):
306e12.
[321] Himebaugh NL, Begley CG, Bradley A, Wilkinson JA. Blinking and tear break￾up during four visual tasks. Optom Vis Sci 2009;86(2):E106e14.
[322] Rahman M, Okamoto K, Thompson R, Katagiri A, Bereiter DA. Sensitization of
trigeminal brainstem pathways in a model for tear deficient dry eye. Pain
2015;156(5):942e50.
[323] York M, Ong J, Robbins JC. Variation in blink rate associated with contact lens
wear and task difficulty. Am J Optom 1971;48(6):461e7.
[324] Jansen ME, Begley CG, Himebaugh NH, Port NL. Effect of contact lens wear
and a near task on tear film break-up. Optom Vis Sci 2010;87(5):350e7.
[325] Kleinman JE, Karson CN, Weinberger DR, Freed WJ, Berman KF, Wyatt RJ.
Eye-blinking and cerebral ventricular size in chronic schizophrenic patients.
Am J Psychiatry 1984;141(11):1430e2.
[326] Karson CN. Physiology of normal and abnormal blinking. Adv Neurol
1988;49:25e37.
[327] Mackert A, Flechtner KM, Woyth C, Frick K. Increased blink rates in schizo￾phrenics. Influences of neuroleptics and psychopathology. Schizophr Res
1991 Jan-Feb;4(1):41e7.
[328] Bentivoglio AR, Bressman SB, Cassetta E, Carretta D, Tonali P, Albanese A.
Analysis of blink rate patterns in normal subjects. Mov Disord 1997;12(6):
1028e34.
[329] Doughty MJ. Consideration of three types of spontaneous eyeblink activity in
normal humans: during reading and video display terminal use, in primary
gaze, and while in conversation. Optom Vis Sci 2001;78(10):712e25.
[330] Hirokawa K, Yagi A, Miyata Y. Comparison of blinking behavior during
listening to and speaking in Japanese and English. Percept Mot Skills
2004;98(2):463e72.
[331] Patel S, Henderson R, Bradley L, Galloway B, Hunter L. Effect of visual display
unit use on blink rate and tear stability. Optom Vis Sci 1991;68(11):888e92.
[332] Cardona G, Garcia C, Seres C, Vilaseca M, Gispets J. Blink rate, blink ampli￾tude, and tear film integrity during dynamic visual display terminal tasks.
Curr Eye Res 2011.
[333] Kaminer J, Powers AS, Horn KG, Hui C, Evinger C. Characterizing the spon￾taneous blink generator: an animal model. J Neurosci 2011;31(31):
11256e67.
[334] Doughty MJ, Naase T. Further analysis of the human spontaneous eye blink
rate by a cluster analysis-based approach to categorize individuals with
'normal' versus 'frequent' eye blink activity. Eye Contact Lens 2006;32(6):
294e9.
[335] Peshori KR, Schicatano EJ, Gopalaswamy R, Sahay E, Evinger C. Aging of the
trigeminal blink system. Exp Brain Res 2001;136(3):351e63.
[336] Agostino R, Bologna M, Dinapoli L, Gregori B, Fabbrini G, Accornero N, et al.
Voluntary, spontaneous, and reflex blinking in Parkinson's disease. Mov
Disord 2008;23(5):669e75.
[337] Evinger C, Bao JB, Powers AS, Kassem IS, Schicatano EJ, Henriquez VM, et al.
Dry eye, blinking, and blepharospasm. Mov Disord 2002;17(Suppl 2):S75e8.
[338] Basbaum AI, Bautista DM, Scherrer G, Julius D. Cellular and molecular
mechanisms of pain. Cell 2009;139(2):267e84.
[339] Pflugfelder SC. Antiinflammatory therapy for dry eye. Am J Ophthalmol
2004;137(2):337e42.
[340] Benowitz LI, Popovich PG. Inflammation and axon regeneration. Curr Opin
Neurol 2011;24(6):577e83.
[341] Devor M. Neuropathic pain: pathophysiological response of nerves to injury.
In: McMahon SB, Koltzenburg M, Tracey I, Turk DC, editors. Wall and Mel￾zack's Text Book of Pain. 6th ed. Philadelhia, PA: Elsevier; 2013. p. 861e88.
[342] Lam H, Bleiden L, de Paiva CS, Farley W, Stern ME, Pflugfelder SC. Tear
cytokine profiles in dysfunctional tear syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol
2009;147(2):198e1e205e1.
[343] VanDerMeid KR, Su SP, Ward KW, Zhang JZ. Correlation of tear inflammatory
cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases with four dry eye diagnostic tests.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53(3):1512e8.
[344] Binshtok AM, Wang H, Zimmermann K, Amaya F, Vardeh D, Shi L, et al.
Nociceptors are interleukin-1beta sensors. J Neurosci 2008;28(52):
14062e73.
[345] Schweizerhof M, Stosser S, Kurejova M, Njoo C, Gangadharan V, Agarwal N, €
et al. Hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors mediate tumor-nerve in￾teractions and bone cancer pain. Nat Med 2009;15(7):802e7.
[346] Kiguchi N, Maeda T, Kobayashi Y, Fukazawa Y, Kishioka S. Macrophage in-
flammatory protein-1alpha mediates the development of neuropathic pain
following peripheral nerve injury through interleukin-1beta up-regulation.
Pain 2010;149(2):305e15.
[347] Gold MS, Gebhart GF. Nociceptor sensitization in pain pathogenesis. Nat Med
2010;16(11):1248e57.
[348] Petho G, Reeh PW. Sensory and signaling mechanisms of bradykinin, ei￾cosanoids, platelet-activating factor, and nitric oxide in peripheral noci￾ceptors. Physiol Rev 2012;92(4):1699e775.
[349] Stevenson W, Chauhan SK, Dana R. Dry eye disease: an immune-mediated
ocular surface disorder. Arch Ophthalmol 2012;130(1):90e100.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 433
[350] Gandhi NB, Su Z, Zhang X, Volpe EA, Pelegrino FS, Rahman SA, et al. Dendritic
cell-derived thrombospondin-1 is critical for the generation of the ocular
surface Th17 response to desiccating stress. J Leukoc Biol 2013;94(6):
1293e301.
[351] Lee SY, Han SJ, Nam SM, Yoon SC, Ahn JM, Kim TI, et al. Analysis of tear
cytokines and clinical correlations in Sjogren syndrome dry eye patients and €
non-Sjogren syndrome dry eye patients. Am J Ophthalmol 2013;156(2). 247- €
253, e1.
[352] Hucho T, Levine JD. Signaling pathways in sensitization: toward a nociceptor
cell biology. Neuron 2007;55(3):365e76.
[353] Guenther S, Reeh PW, Kress M. Rises in [Ca2þ]imediate capsaicin- and
proton-induced heat sensitization of rat primary nociceptive neurons. Eur J
Neurosci 1999;11(9):3143e50.
[354] Huang J, Zhang X, McNaughton PA. Inflammatory pain: the cellular basis of
heat hyperalgesia. Curr Neuropharmacol 2006;4(3):197e206.
[355] Chen WC, Davis RL. Voltage-gated and two-pore-domain potassium chan￾nels in murine spiral ganglion neurons. Hear Res 2006;222(1e2):89e99.
[356] Tappe-Theodor A, Constantin CE, Tegeder I, Lechner SG, Langeslag M,
Lepcynzsky P, et al. Ga(q/11) signaling tonically modulates nociceptor
function and contributes to activity-dependent sensitization. Pain
2012;153(1):184e96.
[357] Piomelli D, Sasso O. Peripheral gating of pain signals by endogenous lipid
mediators. Nat Neurosci 2014;17(2):164e74.
[358] Woolf CJ, Salter MW. Neuronal plasticity: increasing the gain in pain. Science
2000;288(5472):1765e9.
[359] Mannion RJ, Costigan M, Decosterd I, Amaya F, Ma QP, Holstege JC, et al.
Neurotrophins: peripherally and centrally acting modulators of tactile
stimulus-induced inflammatory pain hypersensitivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 1999;96(16):9385e90.
[360] Mizumura K, Murase S. Role of nerve growth factor in pain. Handb Exp
Pharmacol 2015;227:57e77.
[361] Kusuda R, Cadetti F, Ravanelli MI, Sousa TA, Zanon S, De Lucca FL, et al.
Differential expression of microRNAs in mouse pain models. Mol Pain
2011;7:17.
[362] Dong Y, Li P, Ni Y, Zhao J, Liu Z. Decreased microRNA-125a-3p contributes to
upregulation of p38 MAPK in rat trigeminal ganglions with orofacial in-
flammatory pain. PLoS One 2014;9:e111594.
[363] Belmonte C, Gallar J, Lopez-Briones LG, Pozo MA. Polymodality in nociceptive 
neurons: experimental models of chemotransduction. In: Urban L, editor.
Cellular Mechanisms of Sensory Processing. London: Springer-Verlag; 1994.
p. 87e117.
[364] Zhang X, Mak S, Li L, Parra A, Denlinger B, Belmonte C, et al. Direct inhibition
of the cold-activated TRPM8 ion channel by Gaq. Nat Cell Biol 2012;14(8):
851e8.
[365] Guthoff Rudolf F, Wienss Holger, Hahnel Christian, Wree Andreas. Epithelial
innervation of human cornea. Cornea 2005;24(5):608e13.
[366] Gallar J, Acosta MC, Gutierrez AR, Belmonte C. Impulse activity in corneal 
sensory nerve fibers after photorefractive keratectomy. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2007;48(9):4033e7.
[367] Al-Aqaba Mouhamed Ali, Faraj Lana, Fares Usama, Otri Ahmad Muneer,
Dua Harminder S. The morphologic characteristics of corneal nerves in
advanced keratoconus as evaluated by acetylcholinesterase technique. Am J
Ophthalmol 2011;152(3):364e76.
[368] Tuominen IS, Konttinen YT, Vesaluoma MH, Moilanen JA, Helinto M, €
Tervo TM. Corneal innervation and morphology in primary Sjogren's syn- €
drome. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44(6):2545e9.
[369] Benítez del Castillo JM, Wasfy MA, Fernandez C, Garcia-Sanchez J. An in vivo
confocal masked study on corneal epithelium and subbasal nerves in pa￾tients with dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45(9):3030e5.
[370] Erdelyi B, Kraak R, Zhivov A, Guthoff R, N emeth J. In vivo confocal laser 
scanning microscopy of the cornea in dry eye. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Oph￾thalmol 2007;245(1):39e44.
[371] Tuisku IS, Konttinen YT, Konttinen LM, Tervo TM. Alterations in corneal
sensitivity and nerve morphology in patients with primary Sjogren's syn- €
drome. Exp Eye Res 2008;86(6):879e85.
[372] Labbe A, Liang Q, Wang Z, Zhang Y, Xu L, Baudouin C, et al. Corneal nerve 
structure and function in patients with non-sjogren dry eye: clinical corre￾lations. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54(8):5144e50.
[373] Staaf S, Oerther S, Lucas G, Mattsson JP, Ernfors P. Differential regulation of
TRP channels in a rat model of neuropathic pain. Pain 2009;144(1e2):
187e99.
[374] Waxman SG, Merkies IS, Gerrits MM, Dib-Hajj SD, Lauria G, Cox JJ, et al.
Sodium channel genes in pain-related disorders: phenotype-genotype as￾sociations and recommendations for clinical use. Lancet Neurol 2014;13(11):
1152e60.
[375] Habib AM, Wood JN, Cox JJ. Sodium channels and pain. Handb Exp Phar￾macol 2015;227:39e56.
[376] Tibbs GR, Posson DJ, Goldstein PA. Voltage-gated ion channels in the PNS:
novel therapies for neuropathic pain? Trends Pharmacol Sci 2016;37(7):
522e42.
[377] Kurose M, Meng ID. Dry eye modifies the thermal and menthol responses in
rat corneal primary afferent cool cells. J Neurophysiol 2013;110(2):495e504.
[378] Meng ID, Barton ST, Mecum NE, Kurose M. Corneal sensitivity following
lacrimal gland excision in the rat. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56(5):
3347e54.
[379] Baron R, Hans G, Dickenson AH. Peripheral input and its importance for
central sensitization. Ann Neurol 2013;74(5):630e6.
[380] Djouhri L, Koutsikou S, Fang X, McMullan S, Lawson SN. Spontaneous pain,
both neuropathic and inflammatory, is related to frequency of spontaneous
firing in intact C-fiber nociceptors. J Neurosci 2006;26(4):1281e92.
[381] Xiao WH, Bennett GJ. Persistent low-frequency spontaneous discharge in A-
fiber and C-fiber primary afferent neurons during an inflammatory pain
condition. Anesthesiology 2007;107(5):813e21.
[382] Reichling DB, Levine JD. Critical role of nociceptor plasticity in chronic pain.
Trends Neurosci 2009;32(12):611e8.
[383] Meng ID, Kurose M. The role of corneal afferent neurons in regulating tears
under normal and dry eye conditions. Exp Eye Res 2013;117:79e87.
[384] Tracey I, Mantyh PW. The cerebral signature for pain perception and its
modulation. Neuron 2007;55(3):377e91.
[385] Tashiro A, Okamoto K, Chang Z, Bereiter DA. Behavioral and neurophysio￾logical correlates of nociception in an animal model of photokeratitis.
Neuroscience 2010;169(1):455e62.
[386] Hylden JL, Nahin RL, Traub RJ, Dubner R. Expansion of receptive fields of
spinal lamina I projection neurons in rats with unilateral adjuvant-induced
inflammation: the contribution of dorsal horn mechanisms. Pain 1989;37(2):
229e43.
[387] Bereiter DA, Bereiter DF. N-methyl-D-aspartate and non-N-methyl-D￾aspartate receptor antagonism reduces Fos-like immunoreactivity in central
trigeminal neurons after corneal stimulation in the rat. Neuroscience
1996;73(1):249e58.
[388] Bereiter DA, Bereiter DF, Tonnessen BH, Maclean DB. Selective blockade of
substance P or neurokinin A receptors reduces the expression of c-fos in
trigeminal subnucleus caudalis after corneal stimulation in the rat. Neuro￾science 1998;83(2):525e34.
[389] Hathway GJ, Vega-Avelaira D, Moss A, Ingram R, Fitzgerald M. Brief, low
frequency stimulation of rat peripheral C-fibres evokes prolonged micro￾glial-induced central sensitization in adults but not in neonates. Pain
2009;144(1e2):110e8.
[390] Woolf CJ, Chong MS. Preemptive analgesia-treating postoperative pain by
preventing the establishment of central sensitization. Anesth Analg
1993;77(2):362e79.
[391] Koltzenburg Martin, Torebjork H Erik, Wahren Lis Karin. Nociceptor modu- €
lated central sensitization causes mechanical hyperalgesia in acute chemo￾genic and chronic neuropathic pain. Brain 1994;117(3):579e91.
[392] Meng ID, Bereiter DA. Differential distribution of Fos-like immunoreactivity
in the spinal trigeminal nucleus after noxious and innocuous thermal and
chemical stimulation of rat cornea. Neuroscience 1996;72(1):243e54.
[393] Okamoto K, Bereiter DF, Tashiro A, Bereiter DA. Ocular surface-evoked Fos￾like immunoreactivity is enhanced in trigeminal subnucleus caudalis by
prior exposure to endotoxin. Neuroscience 2009;159(2):787e94.
[394] Ro LS, Chang KH. Neuropathic pain: mechanisms and treatments. Chang
Gung Med J 2005;28(9):597e605.
[395] Oswald DJ, Lee A, Trinidad M, Chi C, Ren R, Rich CB, et al. Communication
between corneal epithelial cells and trigeminal neurons is facilitated by
purinergic (P2) and glutamatergic receptors. PLoS One 2012;7:e44574.
[396] Ren K, Dubner R. Neuron-glia crosstalk gets serious: role in pain hypersen￾sitivity. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2008;21(5):570e9.
[397] Ji RR, Berta T, Nedergaard M. Glia and pain: is chronic pain a gliopathy? Pain
2013;154(Suppl 1):S10e28.
[398] Loggia ML, Chonde DB, Akeju O, Arabasz G, Catana C, Edwards RR, et al.
Evidence for brain glial activation in chronic pain patients. Brain 2015;138(Pt
3):604e15.
[399] Watkins LR, Hutchinson MR, Ledeboer A, Wieseler-Frank J, Milligan ED,
Maier SF. Norman Cousins Lecture. Glia as the “bad guys”: implications for
improving clinical pain control and the clinical utility of opioids. Brain Behav
Immun 2007;21(2):131e46.
[400] McNally L, Bhagwagar Z, Hannestad J. Inflammation, glutamate, and glia in
depression: a literature review. CNS Spectr 2008;13(6):501e10.
[401] Khasabov SG, Malecha P, Noack J, Tabakov J, Okamoto K, Bereiter DA, et al.
Activation of rostral ventromedial medulla neurons by noxious stimulation
of cutaneous and deep craniofacial tissues. J Neurophysiol 2015;113(1):
14e22.
[402] Barr MS, Farzan F, Davis KD, Fitzgerald PB, Daskalakis ZJ. Measuring
GABAergic inhibitory activity with TMS-EEG and its potential clinical
application for chronic pain. J Neuroimmun Pharmacol 2013;8(3):535e46.
[403] Scholz J, Woolf CJ. The neuropathic pain triad: neurons, immune cells and
glia. Nat Neurosci 2007;10(11):1361e8.
[404] Rosenthal P, Baran I, Jacobs DS. Corneal pain without stain: is it real? Ocul
Surf 2009;7(1):28e40.
[405] Greenspan JD, Slade GD, Bair E, Dubner R, Fillingim RB, Ohrbach R, et al. Pain
sensitivity risk factors for chronic TMD: descriptive data and empirically
identified domains from the OPPERA case control study. J Pain 2011;12(11
Suppl):T61e74.
[406] Neziri AY, Curatolo M, Limacher A, Nüesch E, Radanov B, Andersen OK, et al.
Ranking of parameters of pain hypersensitivity according to their discrimi￾native ability in chronic low back pain. Pain 2012;153(10):2083e91.
[407] Granovsky Y. Conditioned pain modulation: a predictor for development and
treatment of neuropathic pain. Curr Pain Headache Rep 2013;17(9):361.
[408] Galor A, Levitt RC, Felix ER, Martin ER, Sarantopoulos CD. Neuropathic ocular
pain: an important yet underevaluated feature of dry eye. Eye (Lond)
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 434
2015;29(3):301e12.
[409] Galor A, Felix ER, Feuer W, Shalabi N, Martin ER, Margolis TP, et al. Dry eye
symptoms align more closely to non-ocular conditions than to tear film
parameters. Br J Ophthalmol 2015;99(8):1126e9.
[410] Asbell PA, Spiegel S. Ophthalmologist perceptions regarding treatment of
moderate-to-severe dry eye: results of a physician survey. Eye Contact Lens
2010;36(1):33e8.
[411] Williamson JF, Huynh K, Weaver MA, Davis RM. Perceptions of dry eye
disease management in current clinical practice. Eye Contact Lens
2014;40(2):111e5.
[412] Varikooty J, Simpson TL. The interblink interval I: the relationship between
sensation intensity and tear film disruption. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2009;50(3):1087e92.
[413] Begley CG, Himebaugh N, Renner D, Liu H, Chalmers R, Simpson T, et al. Tear
breakup dynamics: a technique for quantifying tear film instability. Optom
Vis Sci 2006;83(1):15e21.
[414] Vehof J, Kozareva D, Hysi PG, Harris J, Nessa A, Williams FK, et al. Rela￾tionship between dry eye symptoms and pain sensitivity. JAMA Ophthalmol
2013;131(10):1304e8.
[415] Merskey H, Bogduk N. Part III: Pain terms, a current list with definitions and
notes on usage. Classif Chronic Pain 1994;2:209e14.
[416] Johnson ME. The association between symptoms of discomfort and signs in
dry eye. Ocul Surf 2009;7(4):199e211.
[417] Nichols KK, Nichols JJ, Mitchell GL. The lack of association between signs and
symptoms in patients with dry eye disease. Cornea 2004;23(8):762e70.
[418] Sullivan BD, Crews LA, Messmer EM, Foulks GN, Nichols KK, Baenninger P,
et al. Correlations between commonly used objective signs and symptoms
for the diagnosis of dry eye disease: clinical implications. Acta Ophthalmol
2014;92(2):161e6.
[419] Goyal S, Hamrah P. Understanding neuropathic corneal pain-gaps and cur￾rent therapeutic approaches. Semin Ophthalmol 2016;31:59e70.
[420] Finnerup NB, Haroutounian S, Kamerman P, Baron R, Bennett DL,
Bouhassira D, et al. Neuropathic pain: an updated grading system for
research and clinical practice. Pain 2016;157(8):1599e606.
[421] Schiffman RM, Christianson MD, Jacobsen G, Hirsch JD, Reis BL. Reliability
and validity of the Ocular Surface Disease Index. Arch Ophthalmol
2000;118(5):615e21.
[422] Begley CG, Chalmers RL, Mitchell GL, Nichols KK, Caffery B, Simpson T, et al.
Characterization of ocular surface symptoms from optometric practices in
North America. Cornea 2001;20(6):610e8.
[423] Johnson ME, Murphy PJ. Measurement of ocular surface irritation on a linear
interval scale with the ocular comfort index. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2007;48(10):4451e8.
[424] Ngo W, Situ P, Keir N, Korb D, Blackie C, Simpson T. Psychometric properties
and validation of the Standard Patient Evaluation of Eye Dryness question￾naire. Cornea 2013;32(9):1204e10.
[425] Uchino M, Dogru M, Yagi Y, Goto E, Tomita M, Kon T, et al. The features of dry
eye disease in a Japanese elderly population. Optom Vis Sci 2006;83(11):
797e802.
[426] Abetz L, Rajagopalan K, Mertzanis P, Begley C, Barnes R, Chalmers R, et al.
Development and validation of the impact of dry eye on everyday life
(IDEEL) questionnaire, a patient-reported outcomes (PRO) measure for the
assessment of the burden of dry eye on patients. Health Qual Life Outcomes
2011;9:111.
[427] Mangione CM, Lee PP, Pitts J, Gutierrez P, Berry S, Hays RD. Psychometric
properties of the National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire (NEI￾VFQ). NEI-VFQ Field Test Investigators. Arch Ophthalmol 1998;116(11):
1496e504.
[428] Nichols KK, Mitchell GL, Zadnik K. Performance and repeatability of the NEI￾VFQ-25 in patients with dry eye. Cornea 2002;21(6):578e83.
[429] Caudle LE, Williams KA, Pesudovs K. The Eye Sensation Scale: an ophthalmic
pain severity measure. Optom Vis Sci 2007;84(8):752e62.
[430] Qazi Y, Hurwitz S, Khan S, Jurkunas UV, Dana R, Hamrah P. Validity and
Reliability of a Novel Ocular Pain Assessment Survey (OPAS) in Quantifying
and Monitoring Corneal and Ocular Surface Pain. Ophthalmology
2016;123(7):1458e68.
[431] Vehof J, Sillevis Smitt-Kamminga N, Kozareva D, Nibourg SA, Hammond CJ.
Clinical Characteristics of Dry Eye Patients With Chronic Pain Syndromes.
Am J Ophthalmol 2016;162. 59-65, e2.
[432] Treede RD, Jensen TS, Campbell JN, Cruccu G, Dostrovsky JO, Griffin JW, et al.
Neuropathic pain: redefinition and a grading system for clinical and research
purposes. Neurology 2008;70(18):1630e5.
[433] Cochet P, Bonnet R. L'esthesiometrie corneenne. Clin Ophthalmol 1960;4.
[434] Vega JA, Simpson TL, Fonn D. A noncontact pneumatic esthesiometer for
measurement of ocular sensitivity: a preliminary report. Cornea 1999;18(6):
675e81.
[435] Belmonte C, Acosta MC, Schmelz M, Gallar J. Measurement of corneal
sensitivity to mechanical and chemical stimulation with a CO2 esthesi￾ometer. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1999;40(2):513e9.
[436] Draeger J. Corneal Sensitivity: Measurement and Clinical Importance.
Springer Science & Business Media; 2012.
[437] Chao C, Golebiowski B, Stapleton F. The role of corneal innervation in LASIK￾induced neuropathic dry eye. Ocul Surf 2014;12(1):32e45.
[438] Golebiowski B, Papas E, Stapleton F. Corneal mechanical sensitivity mea￾surement using a staircase technique. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 2005;25(3):
246e53.
[439] Millodot Michel. Psychophysical scaling of corneal sensitivity. Psychon Sci
1968;12(8):401e2.
[440] Feng Y, Simpson TL. Nociceptive sensation and sensitivity evoked from hu￾man cornea and conjunctiva stimulated by CO2. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2003;44(2):529e32.
[441] Murphy Paul J, Patel Sudi, Marshall John. A new non-contact corneal aes￾thesiometer (NCCA). Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 1996;16(2):101e7.
[442] Papas EB, Keay L, Golebiowski B. Estimating a just-noticeable difference for
ocular comfort in contact lens wearers. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2011;52(7):4390e4.
[443] Basuthkar Sundar Rao S, Simpson TL. Measurement of difference thresholds
on the ocular surface. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55(2):1095e100.
[444] Norn MS. Conjunctival sensitivity in normal eyes. Acta Ophthalmol
1973;51(1):58e66.
[445] McGowan DP, Lawrenson JG, Ruskell GL. Touch sensitivity of the eyelid
margin and palpebral conjunctiva. Acta Ophthalmol 1994;72(1):57e60.
[446] Golebiowski B, Chim K, So J, Jalbert I. Lid margins: sensitivity, staining,
meibomian gland dysfunction, and symptoms. Optom Vis Sci 2012;89(10):
1443e9.
[447] Xu KP, Yagi Y, Tsubota K. Decrease in corneal sensitivity and change in tear
function in dry eye. Cornea 1996;15(3):235e9.
[448] Versura P, Frigato M, Cellini M, Mule R, Malavolta N, Campos EC. Diagnostic 
performance of tear function tests in Sjogren's syndrome patients. Eye
(Lond) 2007;21(2):229e37.
[449] Barboza MN, Barboza GN, de Melo GM, Sato E, Dantas MC, Dantas PE, et al.
Correlaçao entre sinais e sintomas de olho seco em pacientes portadores da ~
síndrome de Sjogren. Arq Bras Oftalmol 2008 Jul-Aug;71(4):547 € e52.
[450] Toker E, Asfuroglu E. Corneal and conjunctival sensitivity in patients with 
dry eye: the effect of topical cyclosporine therapy. Cornea 2010;29(2):
133e40.
[451] Kim IG, Lee JH, Kim SS. Reduced corneal sensitivity in patients with rheu￾matoid arthritis. Cornea 2012;31(12):1381e5.
[452] Labbe A, Alalwani H, Van Went C, Brasnu E, Georgescu D, Baudouin C. The 
relationship between subbasal nerve morphology and corneal sensation in
ocular surface disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53(8):4926e31.
[453] Nepp J, Wirth M. Fluctuations of Corneal Sensitivity in Dry Eye Syndromes-A
Longitudinal Pilot Study. Cornea 2015;34(10):1221e6.
[454] Rahman EZ, Lam PK, Chu CK, Moore Q, Pflugfelder SC. Corneal Sensitivity in
Tear Dysfunction and its Correlation With Clinical Parameters and Blink Rate.
Am J Ophthalmol 2015;160(5):858e66. e5.
[455] Adatia FA, Michaeli-Cohen A, Naor J, Caffery B, Bookman A, Slomovic A.
Correlation between corneal sensitivity, subjective dry eye symptoms and
corneal staining in Sjogren's syndrome. Can J Ophthalmol 2004;39(7): €
767e71.
[456] Situ P, Simpson TL, Fonn D, Jones LW. Conjunctival and corneal pneumatic
sensitivity is associated with signs and symptoms of ocular dryness. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49(7):2971e6.
[457] De Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC. Corneal epitheliopathy of dry eye induces hy￾peresthesia to mechanical air jet stimulation. Am J Ophthalmol 2004;137(1):
109e15.
[458] Spierer O, Felix ER, McClellan AL, Parel JM, Gonzalez A, Feuer WJ, et al.
Corneal Mechanical Thresholds Negatively Associate With Dry Eye and
Ocular Pain Symptoms. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2016;57(2):617e25.
[459] Bourcier T, Acosta MC, Borderie V, Borras F, Gallar J, Bury T, et al. Decreased
corneal sensitivity in patients with dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2005;46(7):2341e5.
[460] Benítez-Del-Castillo JM, Acosta MC, Wassfi MA, Díaz-Valle D, Gegúndez JA,
Fernandez C, et al. Relation between corneal innervation with confocal mi￾croscopy and corneal sensitivity with noncontact esthesiometry in patients
with dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48(1):173e81.
[461] Golebiowski B, Papas E, Stapleton F. Assessing the sensory function of the
ocular surface: Implications of use of a non-contact air jet aesthesiometer
versus the CocheteBonnet aesthesiometer. Exp Eye Res 2011;92(5):408e13.
[462] Kaido M, Kawashima M, Ishida R, Tsubota K. Relationship of Corneal Pain
Sensitivity With Dry Eye Symptoms in Dry Eye With Short Tear Break-Up
Time. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2016;57(3):914e9.
[463] Bron AJ, Yokoi N, Gafney E, Tiffany JM. Predicted phenotypes of dry eye:
proposed consequences of its natural history. Ocul Surf 2009;7(2):78e92.
[464] Sullivan B. Challenges in using signs and symptoms to evaluate new bio￾markers of dry eye disease. Ocul Surf 2014;12(1):2e9.
[465] Chao C, Stapleton F, Badarudin E, Golebiowski B. Ocular surface sensitivity
repeatability with Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92(2):
183e9.
[466] Bourcier T, Acosta MC, Borderie V, Borras F, Gallar J, Bury T, et al. Decreased
corneal sensitivity in patients with dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2005;46(7):2341e5.
[467] Geber C, Baumg€
artner U, Schwab R, Müller H, Stoeter P, Dieterich M, et al.
Revised definition of neuropathic pain and its grading system: an open case
series illustrating its use in clinical practice. Am J Med 2009;122(10 Suppl):
S3e12.
[468] Rosenthal P, Borsook D. The corneal pain system. Part I: the missing piece of
the dry eye puzzle. Ocul Surf 2012;10(1):2e14.
[469] Carney LG, Hill RM. The nature of normal blinking patterns. Acta Ophthalmol
1982;60(3):427e33.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 435
[470] The definition and classification of dry eye disease: report of the definition
and classification subcommittee of the international dry eye workshop. Ocul
Surf 2007;2007(5):75e92.
[471] Ousler 3rd GW, Hagberg KW, Schindelar M, Welch D, Abelson MB. The
Ocular Protection Index. Cornea 2008;27(5):509e13.
[472] Orchard LN, Stern JA. Blinks as an index of cognitive activity during reading.
Integr Physiol Behav Sci 1991 Apr-Jun;26(2):108e16.
[473] Stave J, Zinser G, Grummer G, Guthoff R. Modified Heidelberg Retinal
Tomograph HRT. Initial results of in vivo presentation of corneal structures.
Ophthalmologe 2002;99:276e80.
[474] Kheirkhah A, Dohlman TH, Amparo F, Arnoldner MA, Jamali A, Hamrah P,
et al. Effects of corneal nerve density on the response to treatment in dry eye
disease. Ophthalmology 2015;122(4):662e8.
[475] Aggarwal S, Colon CM, Kheirkhah A, Hamrah P. Efficacy of Autologous Serum
Tears for Treatment of Severe Corneal Pain in Patients with Corneal Neu￾ropathy: An In Vivo Confocal Microscopy Study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2014;55:1468.
[476] Aggarwal S, Kheirkhah A, Cavalcanti BM, Cruzat A, Colon C, Brown E, et al.
Autologous Serum Tears for Treatment of Photoallodynia in Patients with
Corneal Neuropathy: Efficacy and Evaluation with In Vivo Confocal Micro￾scopy. Ocul Surf 2015;13(3):250e62.
[477] Alhatem A, Cavalcanti B, Hamrah P. In vivo confocal microscopy in dry eye
disease and related conditions. Semin Ophthalmol 2012 Sep-Nov;27(5e6):
138e48.
[478] Villani E, Baudouin C, Efron N, Hamrah P, Kojima T, Patel SV, et al. In vivo
confocal microscopy of the ocular surface: from bench to bedside. Curr Eye
Res 2014;39(3):213e31.
[479] Villani E, Galimberti D, Viola F, Mapelli C, Del Papa N, Ratiglia R. Corneal
involvement in rheumatoid arthritis: an in vivo confocal study. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49(2):560e4.
[480] Villani Edoardo, Magnani Fabrizio, Viola Francesco, Santaniello Alessandro,
Scorza Raffaella, Nucci Paolo, et al. In Vivo Confocal Evaluation of the Ocular
Surface Morpho-Functional Unit in Dry Eye. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90(6):
576e86.
[481] Hosal BM, Ornek N, Zilelioglu G, Elhan AH. Morphology of corneal nerves and
corneal sensation in dry eye: a preliminary study. Eye 2005;19:1276e9.
[482] Zhang XC, Kainz V, Burstein R, Levy D. Tumor necrosis factor-a induces
sensitization of meningeal nociceptors mediated via local COX and p38 MAP
kinase actions. Pain 2011;152(1):140e9.
[483] De Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC. Corneal epitheliopathy of dry eye induces hy￾peresthesia to mechanical air jet stimulation. Am J Ophthalmol 2004;137(1):
109e15.
[484] Zhang M, Chen J, Luo L, Xiao Q, Sun M, Liu Z. Altered corneal nerves in
aqueous tear deficiency viewed by in vivo confocal microscopy. Cornea
2005;24(7):818e24.
[485] Villani E, Galimberti D, Viola F, Mapelli C, Ratiglia R. The cornea in Sjogren's
syndrome: an in vivo confocal study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48(5):
2017e22.
[486] Theophanous C, Jacobs DS, Hamrah P. Corneal Neuralgia after LASIK. Optom
Vis Sci 2015;92(9):e233e40.
[487] Begley CG, Chalmers RL, Abetz L, Venkataraman K, Mertzanis P, Caffery BA,
et al. The relationship between habitual patient-reported symptoms and
clinical signs among patients with dry eye of varying severity. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2003;44(11):4753e61.
[488] Cuevas M, Gonzalez-García MJ, Castellanos E, Quispaya R, Parra Pde L,
Fernandez I, et al. Correlations among symptoms, signs, and clinical tests in 
evaporative-type dry eye disease caused by Meibomian gland dysfunction
(MGD). Curr Eye Res 2012;37(10):855e63.
[489] Dana MR. Corneal antigen-presenting cells: diversity, plasticity, and
disguise: the Cogan lecture. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45:722e7. 1.
[490] Hamrah P, Dana MR. Corneal antigen-presenting cells. Chem Immunol Al￾lergy 2007;92:58e70.
[491] Schaumburg CS, Siemasko KF, De Paiva CS, Wheeler LA, Niederkorn JY,
Pflugfelder SC, et al. Ocular Surface APCs Are Necessary for Autoreactive T
Cell-Mediated Experimental Autoimmune Lacrimal Keratoconjunctivitis. J
Immunol 2011;187(7):3653e62.
[492] Pflugfelder SC, Stern ME. Mucosal environmental sensors in the pathogen￾esis of dry eye. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 2014;10(9):1137e40.
[493] Mayer WJ, Mackert MJ, Kranebitter N, Messmer EM, Grüterich M, Kampik A,
et al. Distribution of antigen presenting cells in the human cornea: corre￾lation of in vivo confocal microscopy and immunohistochemistry in different
pathologic entities. Curr Eye Res 2012;37(11):1012e8.
[494] Knickelbein JE, Buela KA, Hendricks RL. Antigen-presenting cells are strati-
fied within normal human corneas and are rapidly mobilized during ex vivo
viral infection. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55(2):1118e23.
[495] Lin H, Li W, Dong N, Chen W, Liu J, Chen L, et al. Changes in corneal epithelial
layer inflammatory cells in aqueous tear-deficient dry eye. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2010;51(1):122e8.
[496] Marsovszky L, Resch MD, Nemeth J, Toldi G, Medgyesi E, Kov acs L, et al.
In vivo confocal microscopic evaluation of corneal Langerhans cell density,
and distribution and evaluation of dry eye in rheumatoid arthritis. Innate
Immun 2013;19(4):348e54.
[497] Marsovszky L, Nemeth J, Resch MD, Toldi G, Leg any N, Kov acs L, et al. Corneal
Langerhans cell and dry eye examinations in ankylosing spondylitis. Innate
Immun 2014;20(5):471e7.
[498] Marsovszky L, Resch MD, Visontai Z, Nemeth J. Confocal microscopy of 
epithelial and langerhans cells of the cornea in patients using travoprost
drops containing two different preservatives. Pathol Oncol Res 2014;20(3):
741e6.
[499] Villani E, Garoli E, Termine V, Pichi F, Ratiglia R, Nucci P. Corneal Confocal
Microscopy in Dry Eye Treated with Corticosteroids. Optom Vis Sci
2015;92(9):e290e5.
[500] Kheirkhah A, Rahimi Darabad R, Cruzat A, Hajrasouliha AR, Witkin D,
Wong N, et al. Corneal Epithelial Immune Dendritic Cell Alterations in
Subtypes of Dry Eye Disease: A Pilot In Vivo Confocal Microscopic Study.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56(12):7179e85.
[501] Qazi Y, Kheirkhah A, Blackie C, Cruzat A, Trinidad M, Williams C, et al. In vivo
detection of clinically non-apparent ocular surface inflammation in patients
with meibomian gland dysfunction-associated refractory dry eye symptoms:
a pilot study. Eye (Lond) 2015;29(8):1099e110.
[502] Sornelli F, Lambiase A, Mantelli F, Aloe L. NGF and NGF-receptor expression
of cultured immortalized human corneal endothelial cells. Mol Vis 2010;16:
1439e47.
[503] He J, Bazan HE. Omega-3 fatty acids in dry eye and corneal nerve regener￾ation after refractive surgery. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2010
Apr-Jun;82(4e6):319e25.
[504] Wu Ying, Chu Renyuan, Zhou Xingtao, Dai Jinhui, Qu Xiaomei. Determination
of the Nerve Growth Factor Level in the Central Cornea After LASIK and Epi￾LASIK Treatment in a Rabbit Model System. Cornea 2009;28(10):1144e8.
[505] Lee HK, Lee KS, Kim HC, Lee SH, Kim EK. Nerve growth factor concentration
and implications in photorefractive keratectomy vs laser in situ keratomil￾eusis. Am J Ophthalmol 2005;139(6):965e71.
[506] Lambiase A, Micera A, Sacchetti M, Cortes M, Mantelli F, Bonini S. Alterations
of tear neuromediators in dry eye disease. Arch Ophthalmol 2011;129(8):
981e6.
[507] Liu Q, McDermott AM, Miller WL. Elevated nerve growth factor in dry eye
associated with established contact lens wear. Eye Contact Lens 2009;35(5):
232e7.
[508] Jones MA, Marfurt CF. Peptidergic innervation of the rat cornea. Exp Eye Res
1998;66(4):421e35.
[509] De Felipe C, Herrero JF, O'Brien JA, Palmer JA, Doyle CA, Smith AJ, et al.
Altered nociception, analgesia and aggression in mice lacking the receptor
for substance P. Nature 1998;392(6674):394e7.
[510] Mikulec AA, Tanelian DL. CGRP increases the rate of corneal re-epithelial￾ization in an in vitro whole mount preparation. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther
1996;12(4):417e23.
[511] Marfurt CF, Murphy CJ, Florczak JL. Morphology and neurochemistry of
canine corneal innervation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42(10):2242e51.
[512] Yamada M, Ogata M, Kawai M, Mashima Y. Decreased substance P concen￾trations in tears from patients with corneal hypesthesia. Am J Ophthalmol
2000;129(5):671e2.
[513] Yamada M, Ogata M, Kawai M, Mashima Y. Decreased substance P concen￾trations in tears from patients with corneal hypesthesia. Am J Ophthalmol
2000;129(5):671e2.
[514] Yamada M, Ogata M, Kawai M, Mashima Y, Nishida T. Substance P and its
metabolites in normal human tears. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002;43(8):
2622e5.
[515] Macia L, Rao PT, Wheway J, Sierro F, Mackay F, Herzog H. Y1 signalling has a
critical role in allergic airway inflammation. Immunol Cell Biol 2011;89(8):
882e8.
[516] Chao Cecilia, Stapleton Fiona, Zhou Xiangtian, Chen Shihao, Zhou Shi,
Golebiowski Blanka. Structural and functional changes in corneal innerva￾tion after laser in situ keratomileusis and their relationship with dry eye.
Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2015;253(11):2029e39.
[517] Mertaniemi P, Ylatupa S, Partanen P, Tervo T. Increased release of immu- €
noreactive calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) in tears after excimer
laser keratectomy. Exp Eye Res 1995;60(6):659e65.
[518] Lambiase A, Micera A, Sacchetti M, Cortes M, Mantelli F, Bonini S. Alterations
of tear neuromediators in dry eye disease. Arch Ophthalmol 2011;129(8):
981e6.
[519] Tervo T, Vesaluoma M, Bennett GL, Schwall R, Helena M, Liang Q, et al. Tear
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) availability increases markedly after exci￾mer laser surface ablation. Exp Eye Res 1997;64(4):501e4.
[520] Vesaluoma M, Teppo AM, Gronhagen-Riska C, Tervo T. Increased release of €
tumour necrosis factor-alpha in human tear fluid after excimer laser induced
corneal wound. Br J Ophthalmol 1997;81(2):145e9.
[521] Vesaluoma M, Teppo AM, Gronhagen-Riska C, Tervo T. Release of TGF-beta 1 €
and VEGF in tears following photorefractive keratectomy. Curr Eye Res
1997;16(1):19e25.
[522] Yu CQ, Zhang M, Matis KI, Kim C, Rosenblatt MI. Vascular endothelial growth
factor mediates corneal nerve repair. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49(9):
3870e8.
[523] Nichols KK, Nichols JJ, Zadnik K. Frequency of dry eye diagnostic test pro￾cedures used in various modes of ophthalmic practice. Cornea 2000;19(4):
477e82.
[524] Baron R, Maier C, Attal N, Binder A, Bouhassira D, Cruccu G, et al. Peripheral
neuropathic pain: a mechanism-related organizing principle based on sen￾sory profiles. Pain 2017;158:261e72.
[525] Onysko M, Legerski P, Potthoff J, Erlandson M. Targeting neuropathic pain:
consider these alternatives. J Fam Pract 2015;64(8):470e5.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 436
[526] Hsu DZ, Chu PY, Jou IM. Daily sesame oil supplement attenuates joint pain by
inhibiting muscular oxidative stress in osteoarthritis rat model. J Nutr Bio￾chem 2016;29:36e40.
[527] Jensen TS, Madsen CS, Finnerup NB. Pharmacology and treatment of
neuropathic pains. Curr Opin Neurol 2009;22(5):467e74.
[528] Finnerup NB, Otto M, McQuay HJ, Jensen TS, Sindrup SH. Algorithm for
neuropathic pain treatment: an evidence based proposal. Pain 2005;118(3):
289e305.
[529] Levitt AE, Galor A, Weiss JS, Felix ER, Martin ER, Patin DJ, et al. Chronic dry
eye symptoms after LASIK: parallels and lessons to be learned from other
persistent post-operative pain disorders. Mol Pain 2015;11:21.
[530] Derry S, Wiffen PJ, Aldington D, Moore RA. Nortriptyline for neuropathic pain
in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;1:CD011209.
[531] Acosta MC, Berenguer-Ruiz L, García-Galvez A, Perea-Tortosa D, Gallar J,
Belmonte C. Changes in mechanical, chemical, and thermal sensitivity of the
cornea after topical application of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46(1):282e6.
[532] Ortiz MI, Castaneda-Hern ~  andez G, Izquierdo-Vega JA, Sanchez-Gutierrez M, 
Ponce-Monter HA, Granados-Soto V. Role of ATP-sensitive Kþ channels in
the antinociception induced by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in
streptozotocin-diabetic and non-diabetic rats. Pharmacol Biochem Behav
2012;102(1):163e9.
[533] Huang CW, Hung TY, Liao YK, Hsu MC, Wu SN. Underlying mechanism of
regulatory actions of diclofenac, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent, on
neuronal potassium channels and firing: an experimental and theoretical
study. J Physiol Pharmacol 2013;64(3):269e80.
[534] Moore RA, Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Toelle T, Rice AS. Gabapentin for chronic
neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2014;27:CD007938.
[535] Attal N, Bouhassira D. Pharmacotherapy of neuropathic pain: which drugs,
which treatment algorithms? Pain 2015;156(Suppl 1):S104e14.
[536] Gilron I, Baron R, Jensen T. Neuropathic pain: principles of diagnosis and
treatment. Mayo Clin Proc 2015;90(4):532e45.
[537] Wang TX, Yin D, Guo W, Liu YY, Li YD, Qu WM, et al. Antinociceptive and
hypnotic activities of pregabalin in a neuropathic pain-like model in mice.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2015;135:31e9.
[538] Lichtinger Alejandro, Purcell Tracy L, Schanzlin David J, Chayet Arturo S.
Gabapentin for Postoperative Pain After Photorefractive Keratectomy: A
Prospective, Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-controlled Trial. J Refract
Surg 2011;27(8):613e7.
[539] Pakravan M, Roshani M, Yazdani S, Faramazi A, Yaseri M. Pregabalin and
gabapentin for post-photorefractive keratectomy pain: a randomized
controlled trial. Eur J Ophthalmol 2012;22(Suppl 7):S106e13.
[540] Faktorovich EG, Melwani K. Efficacy and safety of pain relief medications
after photorefractive keratectomy: review of prospective randomized trials. J
Cataract Refract Surg 2014;40(10):1716e30.
[541] Knotkova H, Cruciani RA. Non-invasive transcranial direct current stimula￾tion for the study and treatment of neuropathic pain. Methods Mol Biol
2010;617:505e15.
[542] Castelnuovo G, Giusti EM, Manzoni GM, Saviola D, Gatti A, Gabrielli S, et al.
Psychological Treatments and Psychotherapies in the Neurorehabilitation of
Pain: Evidences and Recommendations from the Italian Consensus Confer￾ence on Pain in Neurorehabilitation. Front Psychol 2016;7:115.
[543] Majithia N, Smith TJ, Coyne PJ, Abdi S, Pachman DR, Lachance D, et al.
Scrambler Therapy for the management of chronic pain. Support Care Cancer
2016;24(6):2807e14.
[544] Bron AJ, de Paiva CS, Chauhan SK, Bonini S, Gabison EE, Jain S, et al. TFOS
DEWS II Pathophysiology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:438e510.
[545] Wolffsohn JS, Arita R, Chalmers R, Djalilian A, Dogru M, Dumbleton K, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:539e74.
[546] Stapleton F, Alves M, Bunya VY, Jalbert I, Lekhanont K, Malet F, et al. TFOS
DEWS II Epidemiology report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:334e65.
[547] Jones L, Downie LE, Korb D, Benitez-del-Castillo JM, Dana R, Deng SX, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Management and Therapy report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:575e628.
C. Belmonte et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 404e437 437
