TFOS DEWS II Diagnostic Methodology report
James S. Wolffsohn, FCOptom, PhD a, 1, *
, Reiko Arita, MD, PhD b
, Robin Chalmers, OD c
,
Ali Djalilian, MD d
, Murat Dogru, MD, PhD e
, Kathy Dumbleton, MCOptom, PhD f
,
Preeya K. Gupta, MD g
, Paul Karpecki, OD h
, Sihem Lazreg, MD i
,
Heiko Pult, MSc (Optom), PhD a, j, k
, Benjamin D. Sullivan, PhD l
,
Alan Tomlinson, FCOptom, DSc m, Louis Tong, FRCS, PhD n
, Edoardo Villani, MD o
,
Kyung Chul Yoon, MD, PhD p
, Lyndon Jones, FCOptom, PhD q
,
Jennifer P. Craig, MCOptom, PhD r
a Ophthalmic Research Group, Aston University, Birmingham, UK
b Department of Ophthalmology, Itoh Clinic, Saitama, Japan
c Clinical Trial Consultant, Atlanta, GA, USA
d Illinois Eye and Ear Infirmary, UIC Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences, Chicago, IL, USA e Department of Opthalmology, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjukuku, Tokyo, Japan
f School of Optometry, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
g Cornea & Refractive Surgery, Duke Eye Center, Durham, NC, USA h Kentucky Eye Institute & University of Pikeville, KY, USA i Cabinet Ophtalmologie, Alger Centre, Algiers, Algeria
j ‘Dr Heiko Pult e Optometry and Vision Research’, Weinheim, Germany k School of Optometry and Vision Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
l Tearlab, San Diego, CA, USA
m Department of Vision Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow, UK n Corneal and External Eye Disease, Singapore National Eye Center, Singapore
o Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan & Eye Clinic San Giuseppe Hospital, IRCCS Multimedica, Milan, Italy p Department of Ophthalmology, Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwangju, South Korea
q Centre for Contact Lens Research, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
r New Zealand National Eye Centre, Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
article info
Article history:
Received 29 April 2017
Accepted 1 May 2017
Keywords:
Diagnosis
Monitoring
Dry eye disease (DED)
Dry Eye Workshop
DEWS
Methodology
Questionnaires
Tests for dry eye
Sub-classification of dry eye
abstract
The role of the Tear Film and Ocular Surface Society (TFOS) Dry Eye Workshop (DEWS) II Diagnostic
Methodology Subcommittee was 1) to identify tests used to diagnose and monitor dry eye disease (DED),
2) to identify those most appropriate to fulfil the definition of DED and its sub-classifications, 3) to
propose the most appropriate order and technique to conduct these tests in a clinical setting, and 4) to
provide a differential diagnosis for DED and distinguish conditions where DED is a comorbidity. Prior to
diagnosis, it is important to exclude conditions that can mimic DED with the aid of triaging questions.
Symptom screening with the DEQ-5 or OSDI confirms that a patient might have DED and triggers the
conduct of diagnostic tests of (ideally non-invasive) breakup time, osmolarity and ocular surface staining
with fluorescein and lissamine green (observing the cornea, conjunctiva and eyelid margin). Meibomian
gland dysfunction, lipid thickness/dynamics and tear volume assessment and their severity allow sub￾classification of DED (as predominantly evaporative or aqueous deficient) which informs the manage￾ment of DED. Videos of these diagnostic and sub-classification techniques are available on the TFOS
website. It is envisaged that the identification of the key tests to diagnose and monitor DED and its sub￾classifications will inform future epidemiological studies and management clinical trials, improving
comparability, and enabling identification of the sub-classification of DED in which different manage￾ment strategies are most efficacious.
© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: j.s.w.wolffsohn@aston.ac.uk (J.S. Wolffsohn). 1 Subcommitee Chair
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Ocular Surface
journal homepage: www.theocularsurface.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtos.2017.05.001
1542-0124/© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574
1. Introduction
The Diagnostic Methodology Subcommittee set out to first
identify tests used to diagnose and monitor dry eye disease (DED)
from a comprehensive review of the academic literature, with a
particular emphasis on changes since the original Tear Film and
Ocular Surface Society (TFOS) Dry Eye Workshop (DEWS) [1].
Studies of test efficacy and/or performance are influenced by the
fact that subjects have often been selected based on the same tests
that are under scrutiny. Similarly, the performance of any “new”
test may be compromised when the test is assessed in a population
of DED patients who have been diagnosed using non-standardized
criteria.
Secondly the committee identified those tests that are most
appropriate to fulfil the definition of DED and its sub￾classifications, and the most appropriate order and technique to
conduct these tests in a clinical setting. The committee also
identified areas in which new tests are emerging, which may in-
fluence the future of DED diagnosis and monitoring. While the
original TFOS DEWS recommended categories of tests that were
considered appropriate to include in DED screening, diagnosis and
monitoring, as well as a series of templates to standardize these
tests [2], the variety of tests in some categories precluded easy
comparison of epidemiological studies or clinical trials of potential
DED management techniques. In addition, the previous definition
of DED from the original TFOS DEWS “Dry eye is a multifactorial
disease of the tears and ocular surface that results in symptoms of
discomfort, visual disturbance, and tear film instability, with po￾tential damage to the ocular surface. It is accompanied by
increased osmolarity of the tear film and inflammation of the
ocular surface” identified key elements presumed to be required
for the diagnosis of dry eye (symptoms of discomfort, visual
disturbance, tear film instability, increased osmolarity and
inflammation of the ocular surface) which might all be expected to
be present (perhaps sub-clinically) [1]. However, all these aspects
are rarely inclusion criteria of studies. Also the definition implied
that dry eye can occur without ocular surface damage, yet staining
is often listed as an inclusion criterion.
The other main aim of the Diagnostic Methodology Subcom￾mittee was to provide a differential diagnosis rationale chart for
primary DED. ‘Mystery patient’ studies have identified that DED is
poorly recognized by non-ophthalmic health professionals, who
are often consulted on self-management [3]. Hence it was deemed
important to provide guidance as to the best questions to ask in
order to differentiate primary DED from conditions that can mimic
some characteristics of DED or cases when the dry eye is secondary
to an underlying condition. Managing the underlying condition
may alleviate the dry eye or change its severity and therefore its
appropriate management. The chart also identifies when specialist
tests and eye observation equipment are needed and, from this,
determines when a referral to an appropriately equipped eye care
practitioner is necessary.
2. Goals of the Diagnostic Methodology Subcommittee
The goals of the Diagnostic Methodology Subcommittee were to
determine the most efficacious battery of tests for diagnosing and
monitoring DED as per the revised definition, and to propose the
most appropriate order and technique to conduct these tests in a
clinical setting. Key diagnostic tests were to be differentiated from
tests that inform subset etiologies. Recommended differential
diagnostic procedures for excluding other forms of disease that
may mimic some of the signs and symptoms of dry eye were also to
be articulated. To be widely adopted, a diagnosis must be based on
tests available in clinical practice.
3. Definition of dry eye disease (DED)
The definition of dry eye has been amended by the TFOS DEWS II
to “Dry eye is a multifactorial disease of the ocular surface char￾acterized by a loss of homeostasis of the tear film, and accompanied
by ocular symptoms, in which tear film instability and hyper￾osmolarity, ocular surface inflammation and damage, and neuro￾sensory abnormalities play etiological roles.” [4] Hence any
indication that specific signs must be present for a patient to be
diagnosed with dry eye has been removed and an emphasis has
been placed on the homeostasis of the tear film. Loss of homeo￾stasis implies the body has lost the ability to maintain equilibrium,
resulting in a hyperosmolar, unstable tear film with associated
sequelae, e.g., increased osmolarity, inflammation, neuropathy and
reduced function (compromised lubrication, hydration). Hence
diagnosis requires knowledge of what is considered normal, even
though this may vary with patient demographics such as sex, age
and ethnicity. There are many aspects of the tear film that could be
considered abnormal, such as its stability, volume, osmolarity, pH
and constituents, many of which are interrelated.
4. Classification of sub-categories of dry eye disease (DED)
The TFOS DEWS II Definition and Classification report identifies
that sub-categories of DED can be considered from those where the
signs are predominantly evaporative (such as from a deficient lipid
layer in meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD)) to those where the
signs indicate aqueous deficiency (a reduced tear volume) more
strongly, and the spectrum in between [4]. The severity of signs
together with the evaporative-to-aqueous bias also form part of the
sub-classification ‘diagnosis’ to aid the management of the patient's
DED.
5. Diagnostic considerations
5.1. Diagnosis and monitoring
Forming an accurate clinical diagnosis is the mathematical
equivalent to the problem of classification, where a multidimen￾sional input vector of observed clinical parameters is mapped onto
a discrete set of output classes, using joint probabilities and history
to inform a pattern recognition algorithm. Optimal segregation of
the variable space is determined by a combination of risk factors
and training data. In one dimension, this concept is represented by
the familiar overlapping histograms shown in Fig. 1a. True positives
(TP) and false positives (FP) are represented by the portion of the
affected and unaffected distributions to the right hand side of the
cut-off. True negatives (TN) and false negatives (FN) are repre￾sented by the portion of the affected and unaffected distributions to
the left hand side of the cut-off. In this example, the cut-off is set to
achieve a high sensitivity, as defined by the ratio of true positives to
the total number of affected subjects in the study. Accordingly,
sensitivity ¼ TP/(TPþFN).
In Fig. 1b, the cut-off is set to achieve a higher specificity, as
defined by the ratio of true negatives to the total number of unaf￾fected subjects in the study. Accordingly, specificity ¼ TN/(TNþFP).
In any one dimension, sensitivity and specificity are inversely
related, meaning that a more sensitive cut-off will cause a higher
rate of false positives, and a more specific cut-off will cause a higher
rate of false negatives.
5.2. Risk factor considerations e selecting an appropriate cut-off
The level of risk of an incorrect diagnosis generally governs the
optimal cut-off for an individual sign or symptom. While there are a
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 540
variety of valid, statistical risk models that can be used to choose an
optimal cut-off, for example, maximizing the ratio of true positives
to false positives, receiver operator characteristic apex, etc, [5]
clinical risk should supersede purely statistical methods when
relying on a small number of signs or symptoms. For example, if a
cataract surgeon understands the impact of an unhealthy ocular
surface on biometry and visual outcomes [6e9], a more sensitive
cut-off is preferable, as there is little to no safety hazard in treating
a DED false positive with lubricants or other first line therapy.
Conversely, the systemic costs of over-diagnosis must be consid￾ered in general practice, suggesting that a cut-off that produces
equivalent risk of false positives and false negatives is more
generally applicable for an individual marker. Equivalent risk re￾sults in a cut-off at the intersection between the affected and un￾affected distributions if the measures of signs or symptoms are
normally distributed.
5.3. Aspects of test validation
No single “gold standard” sign or symptom that correlates
perfectly with the DED state has been established. If one existed, the
distributions of this theoretical marker would be very similar to
Fig. 1a and b, with a very small overlap in the affected and unaffected
curves. Instead, there is a significant overlap between normal and
DED distributions of currently available metrics, as all signs and
symptoms fluctuate over time and vary significantly within different
levels of disease severity [10,11]. Actual histograms are far more
similar to Fig. 1c than to the idealized tests of Fig. 1a & Fig. 1b [12,13].
5.3.1. Sampling & spectrum bias
The lack of a gold standard makes it very difficult to establish
true referent histograms when evaluating new diagnostic tests. The
traditional approach to DED classification requires DED subjects to
satisfy all criteria within a series of sensitive thresholds (such as
Ocular Surface Disease Index (OSDI)  13, Schirmer < 10 mm/5 min,
TBUT < 10 s, positive staining) and normal controls to satisfy all
criteria within another, non-overlapping set (such as: OSDI < 7,
Schirmer  10 mm/5 min, TBUT  10 s, negative staining) [14].
While this approach can produce strikingly high sensitivities and
specificities of the diagnostic methods under evaluation, as has
been done for the recent introductions of both matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) (85% sensitivity) [14], and tear os￾molarity (87% sensitivity) [15], this approach excludes a large
number of DED patients, as signs and symptoms are uncorrelated
across the broad population and do not move in synchrony
[16e22]. For instance, it is very common to encounter a patient
with a high level of symptoms and yet a lack of evidence of staining.
Similarly, patients can be asymptomatic but exhibit obstructed
meibomian glands, short breakup time and high osmolarity [22].
Excluding these uncategorized individuals prevents randomization
across the broad population and describes sampling bias. Gaps in
the inclusion criteria lead to spectrum bias, where normal patients
are compared to more severe patients, to the exclusion of the mild
to moderate subjects that are difficult to categorize [14]. Both
sampling and spectrum bias will improve the sensitivity and
specificity of a particular study, but will also increase the mean of
the affected sample, shift the intersection of the two histograms to
produce an unreasonably high cut-off, and result in unexpectedly
poor sensitivity in the broad population. This is particularly rele￾vant to regulatory trials, where labelled performance may not be
replicated in the field, if tested on populations that are different to
those included in the trial. For example, in the 510(k) summary of a
new MMP-9 test, one site reported 97% sensitivity in diagnosing
mild DED subjects at  40 ng/mL, while the other three sites re￾ported 66%, 67% and 76% sensitivity (https://www.accessdata.fda.
gov/cdrh_docs/pdf13/K132066.pdf). In milder populations that
Fig. 1. Segregation of data (such as tear osmolarity or stain grade) for diagnosis concepts: a) representation by overlapping histograms. True positives (TP) and false positives (FP) are
represented by the portion of the affected and unaffected distributions to the right hand side of the cut-off (A). True negatives (TN) and false negatives (FN) are represented by the
portion of the affected and unaffected distributions to the left hand side of the cut-off (A). In this example, the cut-off is set to achieve a high sensitivity, as defined by the ratio of TP to the
total number of affected subjects in the study (TPþFN); b) cut-off (B) set to achieve a higher specificity, as defined by the ratio of TN to the total number of unaffected subjects in the study
(TNþFP); c) in reality there is significant overlap between normal and DED distributions of currently available metrics, as all signs and symptoms fluctuate over time and vary
significantly within different levels of disease severity; d) additional observations (represented by multiple dimensions to the diagnostic vector), increases sensitivity and specificity
simultaneously, eventually allowing clear segregation of the affected and unaffected populations at higher orders, even if there is significant overlap in lower dimensions.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 541
did not apply the regulatory trial inclusion criteria, the 40 ng/mL
cut-off demonstrated an 11% sensitivity [23]. Similarly, using an
equivalent risk threshold of  312 mOsm/L applied to a broad
population segregated by uncorrelated clinical signs, tear osmo￾larity reported a sensitivity of 73% [13], and 67% in a milder pop￾ulation outside the trial setting [23].
As a counterpoint in evaluating new diagnostic metrics, it is not
clear whether spectrum bias is undesirable when there is no reli￾able gold standard to definitively diagnose DED. Without a
competent benchmark for delineating affected and unaffected
populations, histograms of subject populations will significantly
broaden and overlap due to misclassification [11], leading to arti-
ficially low sensitivity and specificity of the new diagnostic metric
under test. Because symptoms and classical DED signs are so vari￾able over clinically relevant timescales [10,24], inclusion criteria
that rely upon these metrics will result in a heterogeneous bias,
impossible for even an ideal diagnostic metric to achieve good trial
performance. When compared to uncorrelated inclusion criteria
across the broad population, novel test sensitivities in the 40e70%
range are statistically pre-determined for a single metric, regardless
of how informative a test is for monitoring therapeutic efficacy or
explaining mechanism of action. A good example of how subject
misclassification can affect the evaluation of diagnostic metrics can
be seen in Huang et al., 2012, which assessed interleukin (IL)-8 and
IL-1 receptor agonist (IL-1Ra) as DED biomarkers [25]. In that study,
the prospective criteria fully partitioned patients from controls in
many DED measures (controls OSDI < 13, corneal staining ¼ 0; DE1
OSDI  13, corneal staining < 4; DE2 OSDI  13, corneal
staining ¼ 4e7; and DE3 OSDI  13 and corneal staining >7), but
resulted in sizeable overlap of IL-8 (inflammatory) and IL-1Ra (anti￾inflammatory) levels between the tears of normal subjects and
mild to moderate DED subjects. Conversely, a post-hoc partitioning
of the patient space excluded the patients that are difficult to
categorize with symptoms between OSDI 13e19 (OSDI < 13,
corneal staining ¼ 0, TBUT > 7; DE1 OSDI  20, corneal staining < 4
and TBUT  7; DE2 OSDI  20 corneal staining ¼ 4e7, TBUT  7;
and DE3 OSDI  20, corneal staining > 7, TBUT  7) that resulted in
clear, significant differences between the subset of controls and
mild subjects [25]. The true performance of a diagnostic metric is
therefore somewhere in between the superlative performance in
trials with spectrum bias and the compromised performance in
trials across a broad population, using symptoms and traditional
signs as inclusion criteria.
5.3.2. Selection bias
Selection bias occurs when efficacy of metrics that were used in
the selection and differentiation of subjects are directly compared to
a novel test that was not used as part of the inclusion criteria [26]. As
clinical signs and symptoms are generally uncorrelated in DED,
novel tests evaluated in this manner will necessarily fail. Many
biomarkers (such as MMP-9, tear osmolarity, IL-1Ra, IL-8, interferon
gamma-induced protein (IP)-10, S100 calcium binding protein A9)
provide novel insight into disease pathogenesis [25,27e29], but
because this information is unavailable from clinical observation,
comparing performance of novel diagnostic metrics against the
traditional signs such as staining, TBUT and symptoms will result in
an apparently poor performance. This creates a paradox where, if a
novel test is correlated to older metrics, it will have strong perfor￾mance in a clinical trial e but there would be no need to measure the
new information. Selection bias can also occur when a novel test is
compared in subjects defined as having a history of DED, as these are
usually based on established diagnostic tests, which the novel test is
then compared to. Furthermore, trials that evaluate new markers
must also prospectively align the time-courses of therapy or
washout subjects, as different markers respond at different rates.
Failure to account for therapeutic timing is also a type of selection
bias that artificially rewards lagging indicators if leading indicators
have already responded [30].
5.3.3. Clinically important difference
In order for a new diagnostic metric to be most useful for
monitoring, the marker should a) play a direct role in the patho￾genesis of the disease, b) significantly improve upon treatment
with an effective therapy, with the best markers traversing a large
dynamic range and c) be specific to DED. Given the inherent tem￾poral variation in all DED signs and symptoms, knowing whether a
therapy has in fact altered the distribution of a sign or symptom at a
single visit is non-trivial, especially with a single additional
observation on follow up.
The term Minimal Clinically Important Difference was first
described by Jaeschke and colleagues in 1989 as “the smallest dif￾ference in score in the domain of interest which patients perceive
as beneficial and which would mandate, in the absence of trou￾blesome side effects and excessive cost, a change in the patient's
management” [31]. Some changes are found to be statistically sig￾nificant, but of a magnitude too small to be noticed by a patient or
to influence clinical management decisions. While clinically
important differences are subjective, possibly changing with cir￾cumstances and time, they inform sample size calculations. In the
field of DED research, only the Impact of Dry Eye on Everyday Living
(IDEEL) e Symptom Bother scale [32] and OSDI [24] questionnaires
have been assessed to determine a clinically important difference
(12 and 7.0e9.9 points, respectively). The differences required in
clinical studies for signs and symptoms of DED, and the resulting
sample sizes needed for clinical studies using these metrics to
determine a significance difference, are described in Table 1.
Another statistical approach, in the form of the reference change
value (RCV), provides a confidence interval that new observations
are not simply within the statistical error of the original distribu￾tion. To calculate RCV, the percentage analytical variation of a
method as measured on traceable control materials (denoted CVA;
or for clinical observations CVA would be intra-observer variation)
and the percentage intra-individual (within-subject) variation
(denoted CVI) within a population are needed.
RCV ¼ 21=2ZðCVA
2 þ CVi
2Þ
1=2
The Z-score for a one-sided, 95% probability that the change in
sign or symptom is “very likely real” is 1.65 [48,49]. In applying an
RCV, the CVI is typically derived from the literature [48]. Since most
DED metrics do not have published data with thousands of subjects
from which to draw reliable CVI data (unlike clinical chemistry
studies for example), it is recommended that one should subtract
the CVA from the CVI before calculating the RCV if the two CV
measures are derived from the same study, so as to avoid double￾counting. If the change in a sign or symptom between visits ex￾ceeds the calculated RCV, there is a high probability that the ther￾apy is working. Very few papers have endeavoured to estimate the
RCV of different tests for DED. Fortes et al., estimated the RCV for
tear osmolarity to be 13 mOsm/L [49], although they did not correct
the CVI for the CVA in the same study. The Fortes estimate would
require a patient with a 338 mOsm/L reading upon initial visit to
measure 325 mOsm/L or below for a clinician to believe a therapy
was very likely having an effect. A corrected CVI would result in an
RCV of about 10 mOsm/L. The authors are not aware of any peer￾reviewed studies that reported an RCV for common clinical DED
tests, but applying published longitudinal data [10], the CVI can be
derived from the average and standard deviation of the subjects
(n ¼ 52), applying a zero CVA for convenience. RCVs for
TBUT ¼ 6.3 s (average over 3 months ¼ 4.8 ± 2.7 s), 9.6/15 for
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 542
Oxford corneal fluorescein staining (2.9 ± 4.1), 14.2/27 for Foulks/
Bron meibomian gland grading (11.0 ± 6.1), and 55.3/100 for OSDI
(34.7 ± 23.7) [10]. Like other statistical tests, the RCV should be
used only as a guide and not an absolute value e the clinician still
needs to take into account all available information when making a
determination about therapeutic efficacy. Comparing the statisti￾cally derived RCVs to the published minimal clinically important
difference suggests that the actual value is somewhere between
these two approaches, less than the RCV and greater than the
minimal clinically important difference.
5.3.4. Parallel testing
In order to increase sensitivity and specificity simultaneously, it
is necessary to expand a diagnostic input vector to include multiple
dimensions. As shown in Fig. 1d, extra observations eventually
allow a clear segregation of the affected and unaffected populations
at higher orders, even if there is significant overlap in lower di￾mensions. For example, if one wanted to classify trees based on leaf
colour alone, it would be a very noisy, imprecise way to separate
elm trees from oak trees. If you add in leaf shape, tree height, sap
characteristics, bark texture and so forth, the task becomes more
straightforward. Sensitivity is optimized in parallel testing by
diagnosing disease if any one of a series of highly specific signs is
measured to be abnormal [50]. Also known as a logical “OR”
operator in computing, parallel sensitivity is calculated by sub￾tracting the product of the two individual sensitivities from their
sum (Sensitivity A þ Sensitivity B e (Sensitivity A x Sensitivity B)),
while parallel specificity is simply the product of the individual test
specificities (Specificity A x Specificity B). Each additional metric
will increase sensitivity, while multiplicatively reducing specificity.
Low specificity tests quickly degrade the combined specificity.
Three parallel tests at 50% sensitivity and 97% specificity achieve
87.5% sensitivity and 91.3% specificity, which is far better than any
one individual test. However, if the three tests had only 90% spec￾ificity, the parallel specificity would degrade to 72.9%. Therefore,
when adding markers in parallel, more specific diagnostic metrics
allow for greater confidence e which is somewhat paradoxical, as
most clinicians judge new diagnostic metrics based on their
sensitivity, not their specificity. As an example, parallel testing of
multiple tear proteins has been shown to be very effective in
diagnosing DED, despite each protein marker being individually
quite insensitive (z40e60% sensitive); when used in parallel as
part of a panel, the combined measurements produce greater than
90% combined sensitivity and specificity [27,50,51].
5.4. Sequence of testing
As even non-invasive tests of DED require alternation of blinking
or bright illumination, the sequence of testing can affect the results.
It is recommended that the tests are performed from the least to
the most invasive [52].
6. Recommendations of appropriate tests for diagnosis and
assessment of dry eye
This section reviews the development and enhancement of
diagnostic metrics of DED, particularly since the previous TFOS
DEWS report. The order in which the tests are reviewed is not a
reflection of their importance, nor their invasiveness. Due to the
issues highlighted in Section 5 with regard to comparing the
Table 1
Clinical differences to detect and resulting sample size calculation based on 2-sample t-test comparison with 80% power and p < 0.05 significance level http://www.
statisticalsolutions.net/pssTtest_calc.php. Note that in more complex experiments, such as those requiring repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), it is better to
consider the number of degrees of freedom (based on both the number of treatments/visits and the number of replicates), with at least 15 recommended (such as 5 subjects
being followed up 4 times during treatment [33]. As dry eye metrics often deviate from a normal distribution, it is recommended that the subject numbers are increased by 10%
to compensate [34].
Test SD of repeated measures Healthy population mean Clinical difference to detect Minimum sample
size per group
OSDI 6.7 on 100 point scale [35] 9.6 ± 12.2 [35]
7.8 ± 3.1 [24]
3.7 ± 6.9 [36]
MCID 4.5 to 7.3 mild/moderate &
7.3 to 13.4 severe disease [24]
14-35 mild-moderate;
4-14 severe
DEQ-5 Unknown 2.7 ± 3.2 [37] 6 (based on variation between
severity classifications) [37]
Not possible
NIBUT 7.2 [38]
2.0 [36]
11.2 ± 6.8 [38]
10.4 ± 4.2 [36]
5 s 33 Tearscope
3 Keratograph 5m
FBUT 2.9 average of 2 repeats [39] 7.6 ± 10.4 [38]
9.1 ± 3.5 [36]
5s 6
Lipid quality (Tearscope) Unknown Not possible
TMH 0.15 (slit lamp) [39]
0.05 (Keratograph 5m) [36]
0.29 ± 0.13 mm (slit lamp) [39]
0.29 ± 0.04 mm (Keratograph 4) [40]
0.27 ± 0.12 (Keratograph 5m) [36]
0.19 ± 0.02 mm (with OCT) [41]
0.34 ± 0.15 mm(with OCT) [42]
0.1 mm 36 slit lamp
4 Keratograph 5m
Bulbar redness (Efron) 0.4 [43]
0.4e0.7 [44]
No reported means- clinically
normal taken as grade 0-1
0.5 grading 6e16
Staining grading (Efron) Only weighted k/ICC [39] No reported means- clinically
normal taken as grade 0-1
Not reported Not possible
LWE No repeatability studies Grade 1
(2e4 mm horizontal staining,
25e50% sagittal staining) [45]
Not reported Not possible
LIPCOF No repeatability studies Grade 1 Not reported Not possible
Schirmer Test
(without anesthetic)
3.9 [39]
11.3 [46]
16.8 [46]
15.5 ± 8.7 [36]
5 mm 5e41
Phenol Red Thread test 7.5 [39]
10.0 [46]
29.0 [46] 5 mm 18e32
Osmolarity (Tearlab) 4.8 [47] 301mOsm/L [15]
299mOsmol/L [47]
5mOsm/L 15
Footnotes: OSDI ¼ Ocular Surface Disease Index; DEQ-5 ¼ Dry Eye Questionnaire e 5 item; NIBUT ¼ non-invasive breakup time; FBUT ¼ fluorescein breakup time; TMH ¼ tear
meniscus height; LIPCOF ¼ Lid Parallel Conjunctival Folds; LWE ¼ Lid Wiper Epitheliopathy.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 543
sensitivity and specificity of tests, recommendations are based on
the level of evidence combined with the invasiveness of the test
and its ability to be conducted in a standard clinical setting, ideally
without highly specialist instrumentation. The recommended
diagnostic ‘homeostatic marker’ tests are the minimum data set to
be collected from all patients identified by the screening ques￾tionnaire (as many patients do not elicit symptoms unless specif￾ically asked) and in all DED clinical trials. However, additional DED
metrics should be applied to identify the subtype of DED and the
specific aspects (such as inflammatory markers or environmental
triggers) relevant to a clinical trial.
6.1. Symptoms
As in the previous TFOS DEWS definition of DED [53], the current
TFOS DEWS II definition for DED describes the presence of ocular
surface symptoms and other signs of DED [4]. Although the rela￾tionship between symptoms and signs of DED is not linear and varies
across individuals and types of DED [54], the ability to accurately
quantify ocular surface symptoms is an important screening tool that
can assist in establishing the medical necessity for additional DED
evaluation. It is also critical for monitoring the progression of the
condition and response to treatments. In this regard, symptom
measurements are very similar to clinical signs of DED. It is therefore
recommended that a validated symptom questionnaire be admin￾istered at the beginning of the patient interaction.
6.1.1. Current questionnaires
In the clinical setting, symptoms or other subjective reports are
typically captured through the patient case history [55,56]. Symp￾toms reported during non-scripted verbal interviews are very
difficult to standardize and quantify. To enhance standardization in
clinical research, symptoms are typically gathered through the use
of questionnaire instruments that are most often self-administered
by the patient or research subject without input from the clinician
or researcher. In DED, these instruments either measure ocular
surface discomfort or vision symptoms associated with DED, the
impact of DED on everyday function, or health-related quality of
life. Table 2 gives a summary of the most frequently used DED
questionnaires, their original and recent citations, and the forms of
validation supported by the literature cited.
For questionnaires that are additionally intended as outcome
measures for registration studies at the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), an FDA guidance document describes a path
for the development of a Patient Reported Outcome (PRO) [84]. For
most DED research and clinical care, the majority of symptom tools
focus primarily on the measurement of symptoms associated with
DED, and these instruments, while valid, do not follow the full
psychometric development plan for PROs. However, even for
symptom questionnaires that are not supporting FDA claims, it is
critical that they be validated for their discriminative ability. It
should also be noted that validation is generally using patient
groups with Sjogren Syndrome versus non-Sjogren Syndrome
ADDE and/or healthy controls, with little focus on EDE. A recent
thorough review by Guillemin and co-workers in 2012 covers the
topic of questionnaire validation, and strengths and weaknesses of
many DED questionnaires [85].
It is helpful if instruments are also shown to be reproducible and
responsive to change in the DED condition. For clinicians, it can be
helpful to have published diagnostic score criteria to screen pa￾tients who may need further testing. Table 2 covers these aspects of
the DED instruments currently in use. Several of these question￾naires are undergoing translation for use in other populations
[65,67]. New DED questionnaires are undoubtedly in development,
and they can all be assessed for the features cited here.
6.1.2. Diagnostic test recommendation and technique
In general, the OSDI is the most widely used questionnaire for
DED clinical trials. The OSDI measures frequency of symptoms,
environmental triggers and vision related quality of life. Many other
questionnaires have established concurrent validity against the
OSDI in recent publications. The consensus view of the committee
was to use the OSDI due to its strong establishment in the field or
the DEQ-5 due to its short length and discriminative ability [37].
The continuous nature of visual analogue scales is attractive for
clinical trials compared to discrete Likert-based question rating, so
questionnaires such as the severity scale of the Symptoms Analysis
in Dry Eye (SANDE) should be considered for repeated comfort
assessment.
6.2. Visual disturbance
6.2.1. Current tests
6.2.1.1. Symptoms. A number of patient-reported outcome ques￾tionnaires have been developed which have items or subscales that
assess patients' visual experiences of DED. These include:
6.2.1.1.1. Ocular Surface Disease Index (OSDI). The OSDI includes
6 questions related to visual disturbance (blurred vision, or poor
vision) or visual function (problems reading, driving at night,
working on a computer, or watching TV). A study showed that the
DED group of 87 patients had worse OSDI composite and subscale
scores for vision-related function, compared to a group of 71 pa￾tients without DED [86].
6.2.1.1.2. Dry Eye Questionnaire (DEQ-5). The DEQ has 4 ques￾tions related to visual disturbance, including the frequency of visual
changes, how noticeable the visual disturbance is in the morning
and at night, as well as how much the visual fluctuation bothers the
respondent. Visual symptoms generally increase in intensity over
the day, suggesting that open-eye conditions might affect symptom
progression [58]. One study using the DEQ found that 10% of pa￾tients with non-Sjogren syndrome DED and 30% of patients with €
Sjogren syndrome complained of impaired vision while others re- €
ported that between 42% and 80% of patients with primary Sjogren €
syndrome experienced “disturbances in daily vision” [18,87,88].
6.2.1.1.3. Impact of Dry Eye on Everyday Living (IDEEL). The
IDEEL questionnaire has 2 items related to visual disturbance
including the extent to which a person is bothered by “blurry
vision” or “sensitivity to light, glare, and/or wind”. Statistically
significant differences in responses to the IDEEL questionnaire
scores across varying levels of DED severity have been observed
[89].
6.2.1.1.4. National Eye Institute's Visual Function Questionnaire
(NEI VFQ-25). The National Eye Institute’s Visual Function Ques￾tionnaire (NEI VFQ-25) is a generic visual function questionnaire
with seven visual domains including general vision, distance vision,
peripheral vision, driving, near vision, color vision, and ocular pain.
DED patients have poorer NEI VFQ-25 scores for the subscales of
general health, general vision, ocular pain, short distance vision
activities, long distance vision activities, vision-related social
function, vision-related mental health, vision-related role diffi-
culties, vision-related dependency, and driving [86,90].
6.2.1.1.5. Dry Eye-Related Quality-of-Life Score (DEQS). The Dry
Eye-Related Quality-of-Life Score (DEQS) questionnaire developed
in Japan has shown strong correlations with 4 subscales (Ocular
Pain, Near Vision, Distance Vision, and Mental Health) of the NEI
VFQ-25 [62].
6.2.1.1.6. Computer-vision symptom scale (CVSS17). The
Computer-Vision Symptom Scale (CVSS17) is a Rasch-based linear￾scale that contains 17 items exploring 15 different symptoms of
computer-related visual and ocular symptoms. The CVSS17 in￾cludes a broad range of symptoms such as photophobia (items A33
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 544
Table 2
Features of a range of Dry Eye Questionnaires & supporting literature. Clinical utility of these questionnaires is summarised on Table 6 of the Epidemiology subcommittee
report of TFOS DEWS II [57].
Name Primary & Recent References Dry Eye Screening
Criteria
Type of Validation Other Comments
Dry Eye Questionnaire
(DEQ)
Primary: Begley et al. (2002) [58] None Discriminant focus
ADDE
Indiana University
Frequency & Intensity
5-Item Dry Eye
Questionnaire (DEQ-5)
Primary: Chalmers et al. (2010) [37]
Recent: Camp et al. (2015) [59]
Galor et al. (2015) [60]
Fernandez et al. (2013) [61]

6 KCS

12 suspect SS
Discriminant focus
ADDE
Subgroup Glaucoma
Across post traumatic stress
disorder, Depression
Indiana University
Frequency & Intensity
Dry Eye-Related Quality-of￾Life Score (DEQS)
Primary: Sakane et al. (2013) [62] None Content
Face
Psychometric
Reproducibility
Frequency & Degree
Impact of Dry Eye on
Everyday Life (IDEEL)
Primary: Abetz et al. (2011) [63]
Recent: Fairchild et al. (2008) [32]
Mild 40e50
Moderate 51e63
Severe >64
Content
Psychometric
Discriminant focus ADDE
Responsiveness CID ¼ 8
Symptom Bother
Alcon Research, Ltd.,
MAPI Values
Symptom bother only
McMonnies' Questionnaire
(MQ)
Primary: McMonnies & Ho (1987) [64]
Recent: Tang et al. (2016) [65]
>14.5
Dry Eye Chinese Translation &
Validation
Frequency only
Ocular Comfort Index (OCI
and OCI-C)
Primary: Johnson & Murphy (2007)
[66]
Recent: Chao et al. (2014) [67]
Golebiowski et al. (2016) [68]
Rasch scaled items
Item reduction
Responsiveness
CID ¼ 3
Chinese Translation &
Validation
MGD Female Cross-section
Frequency & Intensity
Ocular Surface Disease
Index (OSDI)
Primary: Schiffman et al. (2000) [35]
Recent: Amparo et al. (2015) [69]
Asiedu et al. (2016) [70]
Baudouin et al. (2014) [71]
Finis et al., 2014) [72]
Galor et al. (2015) [60]
Miller et al. (2010) [73]
Ogawa et al. (2013) [74]
Mild 13e22
Moderate 23-32
Severe  33
Concurrent with SANDE
Concurrent with SPEED
Severe  33
Concurrent with SPEED
Concurrent with DEQ5
CID ¼ 7.0e9.9
GVHD Subgroup
Allergan, Inc.
Better for Research than SANDE
Better for ADDE than SPEED
Frequency & Intensity
Symptom Assessment in
Dry Eye (SANDE)
Primary: Schaumberg et al. (2007) [75]
Recent: Amparo et al. (2015) [69]
Saboo et al. (2015) [76]
Concurrent with OSDI
Concurrent with OSDI, NEI-VFQ
Frequency & Intensity Visual
Analogue Scale
Better for Clinical than OSDI
Standard Patient Evaluation
of Eye Dryness (SPEED)
Primary: Blackie et al. (2009) [77]
Recent: Asiedu et al. (2016) [70]
Finis et al. (2014) [72]
Concurrent with OSDI
Concurrent with OSDI
Frequency & Intensity
Better for MGD Dry Eye
Developed for Use with Contact Lens Wearers
Contact Lens Dry Eye
Questionnaire
(CLDEQ)
Primary: Begley et al. (2001) [78]
Nichols et al. (2002) [79]
Yes
Screening
Frequency & Intensity
8-Item Contact Lens Dry
Eye Questionnaire
(CLDEQ-8)
Primary: Chalmers et al. (2012) [80]
Recent: Chalmers et al. (2016) [81]

12 ¼ CLD Discriminant
Concurrent with Overall
Opinion of CLs
CID ¼ 3
Responsiveness
Concurrent with Overall
Opinion of CLs,
Eye Dryness & Eye Sensitivity
Frequency & Intensity
Soft Contact Lenses
Contact Lens Impact on
Quality of Life (CLIQ)
Primary: Pesudovs et al. (2006) [82]
Recent: Erdurmus et al. (2009) [83]
Yes
QoL
Keratoconus only
Rasch scaling
Across CL types
Frequency of bundled
symptoms
More of a contact lens related
QoL questionnaire than a direct
measure of symptoms
Footnotes: Abbreviations in alphabetical order: ADDE ¼ Aqueous Deficient Dry Eye, CLD ¼ Contact Lens Discomfort, MGD ¼ Meibomian Gland Dysfunction, QoL ¼ Quality of
Life. CID ¼ clinically important difference, GVHD ¼ Graft Versus Host Disease, NEI-VFQ ¼ National Eye Institute - Visual Function Questionnaire.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 545
and C23) and “blinking a lot” (item A20), and has been reported to
be valuable in the evaluation of computer-related visual and ocular
symptoms [91].
6.2.1.2. Functional tests. Conventional distance and near visual
acuity testing, employing Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy
Study (ETDRS) and Lighthouse near vision charts, showed signifi-
cant deterioration in symptomatic and asymptomatic OSD subjects,
which improved temporarily with instillation of artificial tear drops
[92,93]. Similar static tests that require reporting the orientation of
sine wave gratings of varying contrast have also been utilised pre￾and post-artificial tear instillation [94,95]. Dynamic methodologies
to assess visual function in DED patients include detection of
randomly located targets of differing contrast during a driving
simulation [96]. Ridder et al. employed computer-generated sine￾wave gratings that were presented briefly (16 msec duration), and
demonstrated that DED patients exhibit a decrease in contrast
sensitivity with tear film breakup [97].
Functional visual acuity (FVA) was first defined by Goto and
colleagues, as functional vision for daily activities [98]. It corre￾sponded to the visual acuity measured with the patient's habitual
prescription, during 10e20 s of sustained eye opening without
blinking, aided by anesthesia. To better standardize the test, a
commercialized system was developed by Ishida and colleagues,
with Landolt optotypes presented in one of four orientations; an
increasing optotyope size is presented when a previous presenta￾tion is incorrectly identified or when there is no response within
the set display time (selectable from 1 to 5 s); a decreasing size is
presented when the answer is correct (SSC-350; Nidek, Gamagori,
Japan) [99]. The visual maintenance ratio is the average FVA divided
by the baseline visual acuity. FVA is reduced in DED patients,
Sjogren syndrome and Stevens Johnson syndrome, more than in €
controls, due to irregularity of the ocular surface and induced
higher order aberrations (HOAs), and it improves with treatment
[98e101]. The application of FVA measurements in ocular surface
disease (OSD) has identified a significant decline of FVA relating to
decreased tear clearance in the elderly and associated with the
short BUT type of DED in office workers, atopic keratoconjunctivitis,
conjunctivochalasis and in elderly drivers [102e106].
6.2.1.3. Aberrations. Initial work examined the optical and visual
impact of tear breakup during periods of non-blinking by quanti￾fying vessel contrast in the fundus images and by monitoring the
psychophysical contrast sensitivity and the spatial distribution of
tear thickness changes by retroillumination [107,108]. Advances in
wavefront aberrometers has enabled assessment of real-time
changes in the ocular optics by evaluating refractive anomalies at
multiple sites over time. Laser in situ keratomileusis (LASIK)-
related dry eyes had greater optical aberrations due to increased
tear film irregularity, compared to healthy controls [109]. Serial
measurements of higher order and double pass (objective scatter)
aberrations after blinking in patients with DED is associated with
increased HOAs resulting, in part, from superficial punctate kera￾titis (SPK) overlying the optical zone [110e112].
6.2.1.4. Light scatter. Scheimpflug imaging has been used to show
that the ocular forward light scattering and corneal backward light
scattering from the anterior cornea are greater in dry eyes than in
normal eyes and that increased corneal backward light scattering in
dry eyes, at least partially, again resulted from central SPK overlying
the optical zone [113].
6.2.2. Diagnostic test recommendation
Visual disturbance is currently assessed subjectively through
ocular symptomology questionnaires. Until well-established
objective clinical measures of visual disturbance become widely
available, there is no specific additional vision test that can be
recommended by TFOS DEWS II for the diagnosis of DED. This does
not preclude vision tools, that are currently under development,
being used to enhance understanding of individual cases of dry eye.
6.3. Tear film stability
The Definition and Classification subcommittee of TFOS DEWS II
have included “tear film instability” in their revised definition of
DED [4]. Impaired tear film stability has been one of the funda￾mental diagnostic criteria for diagnosing abnormality of the tear
film and many ways of evaluating tear film stability have been
described [114].
6.3.1. Current tests
6.3.1.1. Tear film breakup time. In clinical practice, the most
frequently employed test of tear film stability is the measurement
of the tear film breakup time (TBUT); this is the interval of time that
elapses between a complete blink and the appearance of the first
break in the tear film [115,116].
6.3.1.2. Fluorescein breakup time. Sodium fluorescein may be
instilled to enhance visibility of the tear film, when the test is
referred to as the fluorescein breakup time (FBUT); however, fluo￾rescein reduces the stability of the tear film and therefore the
measurement may not be an accurate reflection of its status
[117,118]. The fluorescein can be instilled in varying volumes and
concentrations using either a micropipette, or more commonly
impregnated strips [66]. Since controlling the volume instilled with
strips may be difficult, the use of narrow (1 mm) strips and dry
sterile applicators have been proposed [118e121]. A standardized
methodology is also important and instructions are generally given
to blink naturally three times and then to cease blinking until
instructed [66]. The reference value for DED diagnosis when fluo￾rescein is used ranges from a cut-off time of less than 10 s [122], to
less than 5 s when smaller, more controlled volumes of fluorescein
are used [123,124]. The sensitivity and specificity of the test have
been reported to be 72.2% and 61.6%, respectively, in individuals
with Sjogren Syndrome € [88]; however, mild and moderate DED
patients have a broad range of FBUT values and the diagnostic value
is less certain for these DED sufferers [13,125]. A significant
downfall of the measurement of FBUT is its dependence on sub￾jective assessment by the observer and attempts have consequently
been made to automate the measurement [126,127]. Despite the
drawbacks of using fluorescein to assess tear film stability, FBUT
still remains one of the most commonly used diagnostic tests for
DED in clinical practice [128e132].
6.3.1.3. Non-invasive tear breakup time. Since tear film stability
can be affected by fluorescein, temperature, humidity and air
circulation, non-invasive breakup time (NIBUT) measurements
have become more popular in both clinical practice and research.
Many of these techniques involve the observation of the specular
reflection of an illuminated grid pattern from the tear film [133],
and these typically result in longer measured values of time to
breakup than stability assessment techniques involving fluores￾cein instillation [118,134,135]. NIBUT can also be measured
through observations of placido disk images that are reflected
from the anterior ocular surface with many of the currently
marketed corneal topography systems [136], and specific software
has been developed to assess localized changes in corneal power,
as an indication of surface irregularities and breakup of the tear
film, with some instruments [137e140]. Automated assessment of
tear film stability is also possible with specific software on
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 546
instruments such as the Keratograph (Oculus, Wetzlar, Germany),
which detects and maps locations of tear breakup over time
[141,142], The NIBUT recorded with automated systems was
initially reported to be shorter than other subjective measure￾ments of NIBUT, and even conventional FBUT measurements
[140e142], however, a recent study described the reverse finding
[143]. A standardized methodology is also important when con￾ducting NIBUT measurements with similar instructions to blink
naturally three times and then to cease blinking until instructed
to blink again [66].
A different approach has been used by other groups of re￾searchers in which high-speed videokeratoscopy is used to esti￾mate the variance of the number of rings detected radially from the
centre of the videokeratoscopic image [144e146]. The changes in
this variance indicate the instability in image quality, which is
directly related to the quality of the tear film, and this has been
used as an estimate of the NIBUT. This technique has been further
refined by Downie using the E300 corneal topographer (Medmont
International Pty Ltd., Victoria, Australia) to measure Tear Film
Surface Quality Break-up Time [147]. The algorithm used identifies
and eliminates images with excessive movement and is able to
recognize shadows arising from eyelashes.
Interferometry is also used to assess the stability of the tear
film in a non-invasive manner [148]. Using this technique, the
time between the blink and the first appearance of a discontinuity
in the lipid layer can be measured, and instruments have been
developed specifically for this purpose [38,149e152]. More
recently an instrument employing interferometry has been
developed, for clinical use, to measure the thickness of the lipid
layer (TearScience® LipiView®, TearScience, Morrisville, NC)
[77,153]; however, this cannot be used to measure the tear
breakup time since only the tear film over the lower half of the
cornea is analyzed and the area of initial break could occur any￾where across the cornea, and is noted frequently at the upper lid
margin [154]. Instruments that do not allow the assessment of the
entire area of the cornea exposed during eye opening may fail to
detect areas of tear film abnormality.
The sensitivity and specificity of the NIBUT varies according to
the specific technique used, with values of 82e84% sensitivity and
76e94% specificity being reported [134,142,147]. A cut-off value of
less than or equal to 10 s has been reported to be indicative of DED
when viewing the reflection of an illuminated grid pattern [134];
The absolute values for breakup time have been reported to be
longer for non-invasive techniques, with a mean difference of 3.7 s
being reported [38]; however, when breakup times are shorter, the
differences between the two techniques have been reported to be
of lesser magnitude [155].
6.3.1.4. Thermography. Evaporation of the tear film results in a
cooling of the ocular surface [156], therefore measuring the abso￾lute temperature and the spatial and temporal changes in tem￾perature during the inter-blink period, can be used as an index of
tear film stability. Infrared thermography is able to measure the
temperature of the ocular surface in a non-invasive manner and
provide an objective, quantitative output [157]. Purslow and
Wolffsohn demonstrated the ocular surface temperature measured
using infrared thermography is principally related to the tear film
[158]. The evidence in the literature indicates that the cooling rate
of the ocular surface is faster in individuals with DED than in
normal eyes, which is assumed to be as a result of a greater rate of
tear film evaporation [156,159e161].
Advances in instrumentation have allowed measurement of the
ocular surface temperature with increasing accuracy, resolution,
and speed [160e163]. Recently, thermography has been used to
differentiate between DED of differing aetiologies, with the lowest
temperatures and greatest cooling rates being reported for pre￾sumed ADDE, and lower rates in dry eyes of presumed evaporative
aetiology [164].
Studies have also been conducted in which ocular surface
temperature and FBUT have been measured concurrently [165,166].
Su et al., demonstrated that areas of ocular surface cooling and
breakup were co-localized [166], and Li et al., reported a direct
relationship between FBUT and ocular surface cooling, implying
that localized increases in evaporation are contributing to tear film
thinning and breakup [165]. Using a customized ocular surface
thermography device, a method has been demonstrated in which
the exact area showing temperature reduction can be determined
by analysing a series of images over a period of 9 s [167]. From this
analysis, a “thermal breakup area” and “thermal breakup time” can
be reported. Furthermore, the subjective sensation of discomfort
has been reported to occur earlier in the interblink period in pa￾tients with DED than in controls (during forced eye opening), and
that the subjective symptoms were correlated to low corneal
temperatures and enhanced tear evaporation [168]. Sensitivity and
specificity values of around 80% have been reported [160,161].
6.3.1.5. Osmolarity variability. An in-depth review of the evidence
relating to osmolarity testing in the diagnosis of DED is provided in
Section 6.5.1.1; however, it is also important to consider how spatial
and temporal variations in tear osmolarity might affect tear film
stability. There is greater inter-eye variability of osmolarity in DED
than in normals [12,15,169], and the inter-eye differences increase
with disease severity [13]. Moreover, this inter-eye variability has
been shown to substantially reduce over time with successful
treatment of DED [125].
While repeated measurements over a period of time have been
shown to be low and stable in normal subjects, DED subjects
showed relatively elevated and unstable readings [170]. This
finding is termed heteroscedasticity, or increasing variation with
increasing value [171]. Keech et al., further reported that the vari￾ability of tear osmolarity of normal subjects was indistinguishable
from the analytical variability of measurements of a control solu￾tion of known osmolarity, suggesting that normal individuals retain
an effective tear film with little variation from blink-to-blink and
day-to-day [170]. In contrast, the tears of individuals with DED
demonstrated increasing variation and the authors speculated that
this was due to “a combination of chaotic or incomplete mixing
between blinks and spatially variable tear film breakup, leading to a
stochastically increased evaporation rate.”
In a small study conducted by Liu et al., a link was reported
between hyperosmolarity and tear instability, suggesting that
transient increases in tear osmolarity may be observed under
conditions of tear instability [172]. More recently, Peng et al., pur￾ported that increases in evaporation, that resulted during pro￾longed interblink periods or as a result of environmental factors
(such as increased humidity and wind speed), drive tear film
breakup, and predicted “massive” increases in osmolarity at the
centre of areas of rupture of the tear film [173].
Indeed variability of osmolarity has been recommended to be a
feature that clinicians should specifically be looking for when
trying to identify patients with DED [13]. Sullivan advocates that
between-eye differences beyond the threshold of 8 mOsm/L should
be considered an indication of the loss of tear film homeostasis that
occurs with DED [171].
6.3.1.6. Tear evaporation rate. An intact lipid layer may be neces￾sary to prevent tear film evaporation [174]. The tear film evapora￾tion rate is used as an indicator of tear film stability [175].
Evaporation of the tear film has been measured using a number of
different techniques including a vapour pressure gradient [176,177],
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 547
and the velocity of relative humidity increase (resistance hygrom￾etry) within a goggle cup placed over the eye [178e181]. Using
these techniques, higher evaporation rates between blinks have
been reported to be associated with poor tear film stability [148],
and DED symptoms [179,182,183]. An absent, or non-confluent lipid
layer has been determined to be associated with a four-fold in￾crease in evaporation rate [148], and a two-fold increase in evap￾oration rate has been reported in patients with keratoconjunctivits
sicca [179]. The rate of evaporation of the tear film has also been
shown to be higher in the presence of a contact lens, and the effect
remains for a period of 24 h after ceasing contact lens wear
[184,185]. Since the evaporation rate is dependent on ambient
temperature [186], humidity [175,180,187], and time of day
[181,188], and can be affected by evaporation from the skin sur￾rounding the eye, use of tear evaporation rate as a diagnostic and
monitoring tool is challenging due to variable measurements.
In an attempt to address these issues, further techniques to
measure tear evaporation rate have been proposed [189e191].
Using an infrared thermography camera [192], tear evaporation
rate can be measured non-invasively while excluding the in-
fluences of the surrounding skin and sealed chambers [189,191].
Rohit et al. have recently described the modification and re￾calibration of a dermatology instrument by attaching a swim gog￾gle cup [190]. Using this instrument, the authors reported being
able to obtain absolute rather than relative evaporation rates both
with, and without, contact lens wear. Despite these developments,
a “normal” tear evaporation rate has yet to be established
questioning the diagnostic relevance of this measurement at the
current time; in addition individual differences in evaporation rate
contribute to the challenge.
6.3.2. Diagnostic test recommendation and technique
It should be emphasised that tear film stability test results are
highly variable [125]. When performing tests to assess tear film
stability, clinicians need to be meticulous about the procedures and
factors that may influence the measurements. Thermography and
tear evaporation rate evaluation are not well-established clinical
techniques. Measurement of the tear breakup time with a non￾invasive technique (NIBUT) is considered preferable to the FBUT
[193] and the two techniques are well correlated [118,194]. Since
there are several different methods for conducting the measure￾ment, standardization is needed for consistency. The measurement
should be made before any other invasive tests are conducted (such
as eyelid manipulation or staining of the ocular surface). The pa￾tient should be instructed to blink naturally three times and then to
cease blinking until instructions are given to blink again, and then
to blink freely between measurements [66]. Where possible, an
automated measurement system is recommended [193], since
subjective measurements taken with a videokeratoscope and the
Tearscope/Tearscope Plus (Keeler, Windsor, UK) have been shown
to vary between measurement sessions and observers [38,195]. A
NIBUT cut-off value of less than, or equal to, 10 s has been reported
to be indicative of DED in Caucasians, when viewing the reflection
of an illuminated grid pattern [134], but the cut-off value with
automated measurement systems is generally shorter [141]. The
difference might be attributable to the slower response rate of the
observer in subjective techniques as well as the objective software
detecting interference in the image capture process and inter￾preting these as breaks in the tear film.
6.4. Tear volume
Although not mentioned directly within the definition of DED,
the tear film volume is important for ocular surface health and its
loss of homeostasis (aqueous deficiency) may be at the same time a
key pathogenic mechanism and a diagnostic sign in DED patients,
independent of evaporative dry eye.
6.4.1. Current tests
6.4.1.1. Meniscometry (tear meniscus assessment).
Meniscometry describes assessment of the tear meniscus and may
take the form of a height, or a cross-sectional volume metric. The
tear menisci serve as reservoirs, supplying tears to the precorneal
tear film [196]. The majority of tear fluid is contained within the
menisci [197], formed by the tears lying at the junctions of the
bulbar conjunctiva and the margins of both the upper and lower
eyelids. The quantitative assessment of the tear menisci is, at pre￾sent, the most direct approach to study the tear film volume. Slit￾lamp techniques to study tear meniscus height (TMH), curvature
(TMR), and cross-sectional area (TMA) are widely used in clinical
practice and show good diagnostic accuracy and correlations with
other DED tests [198,199]. However, this approach is operator￾dependent and has important limitations, mainly related to fluo￾rescein instillation and dependence on time-from-blink, which
have potential impact on the tear film characteristics. The simplest
type of slit-lamp meniscometry, based on judging the meniscus
height by comparison to the variable slit-lamp beam height, has
shown poor inter-visit repeatability [39]. Specialized meniscometry
systems, equipped with a rotatable projection system that includes
a target comprising a series of black and white stripes, a half￾silvered mirror, and a digital video recorder, have been developed
to facilitate simple and dynamic visualization of the tear meniscus,
without the need for fluorescein instillation [200e202]. Menisc￾ometry can be influenced by time after a blink, measurement locus
along the lid margin, time of day, temperature, humidity, air speed,
and illumination [2,66,203].
Application software for the iPod touch (Apple Inc., Cuperti￾no,CA) has been recently developed to create a portable digital
meniscometer that generates a grating of parallel black and white
bands on the display, and which is reflected from the tear film at a
working distance of 50 cm. This new slit-lamp mounted digital
meniscometer exhibits good reproducibility, good agreement with
both conventional video-meniscometry [204] and optical coher￾ence tomography (OCT) meniscometry [205], and an ability to
facilitate detection of tear meniscus changes following the instil￾lation of artificial tears [206].
OCT assessment of the tear meniscus, described as an emerging
technology in the TFOS DEWS 2007 report [2], has been extensively
studied in the last ten years [207e226]. Upper and lower TMH,
TMA, TMR and tear meniscus depth are, at present, the most
commonly studied parameters. Spectral-domain OCT meniscom￾etry has shown good intra-observer and inter-observer repeat￾ability [212,219,224], that is superior to time-domain OCT
[213,226]. The measurements are instrument-dependent
[213,216], and can be biased by conjunctivochalasis, LIPCOF, disor￾ders of lid margin congruity, and apposition between the lid and
ocular surface [218,227]. The main advantages of OCT meniscom￾etry are that it is non-invasive and image acquisition is rapid and
simple, however analysis of the image may be complex, time￾consuming and operator-dependent [224]. The development of
validated measurement software is needed, ideally allowing dy￾namic image analysis to minimize interfering factors related to
head, eye and eyelid movements [211,224].
6.4.1.2. Phenol red thread test. The phenol red thread (PRT) test that
received brief mention in TFOS DEWS report [2], and was removed
more than 10 years ago from the Japanese DED diagnostic criteria,
consists of a thin cotton thread soaked with phenol red, a pH￾sensitive dye. When dry, the thread assumes a yellow color, but
when moistened by tears the thread turns red as a consequence of
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 548
the slightly alkaline physiological pH of tears (between pH 7 and 8)
[228]. The test is performed by hooking the folded end of the
thread, within the temporal one-third of the eyelid, over the eyelid
margin for 15 s. The small dimensions of the cotton thread should
limit the chance of eliciting substantial reflex tearing [229], and the
minimal amount of pH indicator soaked on the thread should
minimize the irritating effect of the test, as shown by the repeat￾ability of multiple PRT tests performed during the same session
[230]. These elements suggest that the PRT test provides an indirect
but realistic measure of the resting tear volume [231,232]. However,
some authors have reported no significant correlation between the
PRT test and tear volume determined with previously established
methods such as TMH measurement or fluorophotometry [230],
and poor correlation between PRT test results and DED symptoms
[17]. Conflicting data, from weak [46], to strong [233], agreement,
have been recently published on the correlation between the PRT
test and Schirmer test. In clinical practice, an arbitrary cut-off value
of 20 mm has been adopted to differentiate DED with and without
aqueous deficiency using the PRT test [234]. A cut-off of 10 mm
gives a sensitivity of 25% and specificity of 93% [235]. Doughty et al.
reported small and not statistically significant differences between
PRT performed with open or closed eyes [236].
6.4.1.3. Schirmer test. The Schirmer test is performed by folding the
Schirmer paper strip (5  35 mm) at the notch and hooking the
folded end over the temporal one-third of the lower lid margin. The
score is the measured length of wetting from the notch, after a
period of 5 min. The Schirmer test without anesthesia is a well￾standardized test, providing an estimation of stimulated reflex
tear flow. Although some authors have reported that the Schirmer
test with topical anesthesia or nasal stimulation might be more
objective and reliable in DED detection [237,238], there is a lack of
high level evidence data on repeatability, sensitivity and specificity
for these approaches [39]. Administering the test with the patient's
eyes closed may minimize the variability of results [239], reducing
the influence of the vertical gaze position [240], and horizontal eye
movements [241]. Several diagnostic cut-off values have been
proposed, from  5 mm/5 min [2], to  10 mm/5 min [228], and a
range of sensitivity (77% [88] e 85% [242]) and specificity (70% [88]
- 83% [242]) values have been reported. The combination of
Schirmer and PRT tests has been proposed to improve the diag￾nostic accuracy, at least in patients with ADDE [228].
A variation of this test, termed strip meniscometry, involves
dipping a strip (made of a 25-mm polyethylene terephthalate
covered with a urethane-based material with a 0.4 mm central
ditch containing a nitrocellulose membrane filter paper strip
impregnated in natural blue dye reservoir) for 5 s into the tear
meniscus [243]. Strip meniscometry with a cut-off of  4 mm has a
sensitivity of 84% and specificity of 58% used in isolation and up to
81% sensitivity and 99% specificity when combined with TBUT
[244].
6.4.2. Diagnostic test recommendation and technique
Meniscometry (volume or height) provides a non-invasive
method to indirectly assess tear volume for DED sub-classifica￾tion, with moderate repeatability especially if digital imaging
rather than observational techniques are adopted. It is traditional to
image the meniscus in the centre of the lower eyelid without lid
manipulation shortly after a blink [66]. The Schirmer test without
anaesthetic remains a diagnostic test recommended for confirming
severe aqueous deficiency (such as in Sjogren syndrome) € [245], but
its variability and invasiveness, precludes it use as a routine diag￾nostic test of tear volume, especially in cases with evaporative dry
eye secondary to MGD where tear quality rather than quantity is
predominantly affected and any subtle reduction in resident tear
volume in the interpalpebral space will likely be masked by the
reflex tearing response on insertion of the strip.
6.5. Tear film composition
6.5.1. Current tests
6.5.1.1. Tear film osmolarity. A recent review of the literature
identified 163 articles published since the year 2000 relevant to the
use of tear osmolarity in the diagnosis of DED [246]. Hyper￾osmolarity of the tear film on the ocular surface causes a significant
increase in interferon gamma, in the absence of large increases
from other Th1, Th2 and Th17 cytokines, which can induce
epithelial cell apoptosis through the JAK/STAT signalling pathway
to induce cell death [247]. Tear osmolarity has been demonstrated
to have the highest correlation to disease severity of clinical DED
tests [11], and has been frequently reported as the single best
metric to diagnose and classify DED [12,13,246]. However, other
studies have indicated current measurement techniques to be
highly variable [248]. Osmolarity generally increases with disease
severity [174], classified as normal (302.2 ± 8.3 mOsm/L), mild-to￾moderate (315.0 ± 11.4 mOsm/L) and severe (336.4 ± 22.3 mOsm/L).
More severely affected subjects exhibit both an increased average
and increased variability between eyes and between visits [11,170],
making the marker heteroscedastic [170]. Various cut-off values for
DED have been proposed in the literature, from 305 mOsm/L [249],
to 316 mOsm/L [12], with reported sensitivities ranging from 64% to
91% [15,23,249,250], specificities from 78% to 96% [249,251], and
positive predictive values ranging from 85% to 98.4% [249,252].
These data support the 316 mOsm/L cut-off as a specific threshold
to better differentiate moderate to severe DED, or when used in
parallel with other specific tests, while the 308 mOsm/L cut-off has
become a widely accepted, more sensitive, threshold for use in
routine practice to help diagnose mild to moderate subjects [13,15].
6.5.1.2. Tear film ferning. Ferning occurs when the tear film is dried,
typically on a glass plate. As the pattern of the tear fern depends on
the composition of the tear sample, tear ferning may be a simple
test for tear film quality at a gross biochemical level. The process
requires a slow crystal growth rate, low solution viscosity and low
impurity levels to permit free-solute diffusion. Seven to 10 min
under normal room temperature (20e26  C) and room humidity
(RH up to 50%) has been recommended [253]. The crystallisation
begins with the formation of a nucleus, due to the supersaturation
of ions with solvent evaporation at the peripheral edge of the drop.
When the sample solute is able to diffuse into areas with a lower
solute concentration, normal crystals can form [253].
Healthy tear samples produce compact, dense ferning patterns,
while in dry eye samples, the pattern is fragmented or absent [254].
Electrolytes may play a role in ferning as hyperosmolarity has been
found to result in deteriorated ferns [249,255]. It has a high re￾ported sensitivity and specificity in Sjogren's syndrome € [256e258].
and rheumatoid-induced keratoconjunctivitis sicca [259], but the
results are more variable in DED [249,254]. Tear ferning is corre￾lated with tear film volume and weakly with tear film stability, but
seems to be independent of individual tear proteins [260]. Tear
ferning changes with contact lens wear have been found to have a
moderately high sensitivity (78.4%) and specificity (78.4%) for
predicting contact lens tolerance in a clinical setting [261]. How￾ever, other studies have found that the tear ferning test had a poor
correlation with tear film stability and symptoms in contact lens
wearers [262].
6.5.2. Diagnostic test recommendation and technique
Despite some potential diagnostic ability, the underlying
mechanisms responsible for producing tear ferning and their
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 549
interaction with dry eye sub-types are still poorly understood and
hence this cannot currently be recommended as a diagnostic test
[253].
With respect to osmolarity measurement, recent data have
reinforced that two values are important to note in tear testing: the
higher value of the two eyes, which is considered more indicative of
the DED process, and the difference in value between the two eyes,
which provides insight about the instability of the tear film [13].
Using the maximum value between both eyes has been shown to
provide a higher dynamic range and larger observable change after
effective therapy than using the average or single eye [10,170], and
this approach is approved by the FDA for commercially available
tests [263]. Normal subjects have little or no diurnal change, with
repeat testing at time intervals of 1 min, 15 min, 1 day, and 5 days,
demonstrating variation largely indistinguishable from the
analytical precision of a commercial instrument (z± 3e6 mOsm/L)
[10,170,264]. Moreover, a longitudinal study showed that tear os￾molarity is the least variable of all the common signs for DED over
clinically relevant time scales [10], which might seem counterin￾tuitive, since tear osmolarity has the highest frequency of variation,
changing blink-to-blink depending on the stability of the tear film
and severity of disease, however the actual amplitude of variation is
strongly dependent on disease severity. Inter-eye differences of
normal, mild to moderate and severe DED patients were 6.9 ± 5.9
mOsm/L, 11.7 ± 10.9 mOsm/L, and 26.5 ± 22.7 mOsm/L, respectively
[13]. The low variation of normal subjects contributes to the high
specificity of the marker and makes it a good candidate for paral￾lelization and therapeutic monitoring. Accordingly, normal subjects
don't display elevated osmolarity, so a value over 308 mOsm/L in
either eye or a difference between eyes  8 mOsm/L are good in￾dicators of a departure from tear film homeostasis and represent a
diseased ocular surface [265].
6.6. Damage to ocular surface
6.6.1. Current tests
6.6.1.1. Ocular surface staining. Punctate staining of the ocular
surface is a feature of many ocular diseases and instilled dyes are
used extensively in the diagnosis and management of DED. In
addition, the distribution of micropunctate staining may provide an
etiological clue [266]. The most frequently used dyes are sodium
fluorescein, rose bengal, and lissamine green. The clinical appear￾ance of fluorescein staining occurs whenever viable cells experi￾ence a compromise to their integrity such as a disruption in
superficial cell tight junctions or defective glycocalyx [266,267]. It is
suggested that there is some weak background fluorescence of
healthy corneal epithelial cells [268]. Rose bengal stains ocular
surface epithelial cells that are unprotected by mucin or glycocalyx,
as well as dead or degenerated cells [269,270]. However, it stings on
instillation and induces reflex tearing. In addition, it has been
shown to suppress human corneal epithelial cell viability in vitro
[271]. On the other hand, lissamine green is less toxic to the ocular
surface and consequently is as well tolerated as fluorescein [272]; it
stains epithelial cells only if the cell membrane is damaged (a vital
dye), irrespective of the presence of mucin, whereas rose bengal,
because of its cytotoxicity, produces staining irrespective of the
state of cell health, once mucin is absent [273,274]; therefore liss￾amine green has largely replaced the use of rose bengal in evalu￾ating ocular surface disorders [13,275]. There have been also
several reports using mixtures of these dyes for simultaneous
staining of the cornea and conjunctiva [272,276,277]. A solution of
2% fluorescein and 1% lissamine green has been found to be optimal
in terms of comfort and staining efficacy, but is not commercially
available [272]. Sequential staining and/or using more than one
paper strip will increase the likelihood of observing ocular surface
damage [277,278]. Fluorescein has a peak excitation wavelength of
495 nm, whereas the commonly used ‘cobalt blue’ light filters of slit
lamp biomicroscopes have a peak of around 450 nm [279]. The
fluorescence peak is around 515 nm within the pH range of the tear
film, so the yellow barrier filter required for optimum observation
should band pass at around 500 nm [279]. For lissamine green, a
red filter (567e634 nm) to enhance contrast against the sclera may
enhance staining visibility [280]. For consistent recording of
staining severity of the ocular surface, there are various grading
systems including the van Bijsterveld system [242], the National
Eye Institute/Industry Workshop guidelines [281], the Collabora￾tive Longitudinal Evaluation of Keratoconus (CLEK) schema [282],
the Oxford Scheme [283], the areaedensity combination index
[284], and the Sjogren's International Collaborative Clinical Alliance €
ocular staining score (Table 3) [285]. Corneal and conjunctival
staining have been shown to be informative markers of disease
severity in severe DED, however, staining of the ocular surface in
mild/moderate DED showed poor correlation with disease severity
[11]. Therefore, observing staining of the cornea and conjunctiva is
considered an important aspect in the clinical analysis of severe
DED.
6.6.1.2. Impression cytology. Impression cytology is a relatively
simple and practical technique that has been used in the diagnosis
of the ocular surface disorders such as DED, limbal stem-cell
deficiency, ocular surface neoplasia, and specific viral infections
[287]. During the past decade, it has become standard to study
squamous metaplasia and goblet cell density of the conjunctiva for
the diagnosis and monitoring of DED [288]. Cells from the first to
third most superficial layers of the epithelium are removed by
application of cellulose acetate filters or biopore membranes, and
the cells can be subsequently analyzed by various methods
including microscopy, immunocytochemistry, immunoblotting
analysis, polymerase chain reaction, and flow cytometry, depend￾ing on the objective of the investigation [289]. Specific examination
procedures for impression cytology are described elsewhere [290].
For analyzing conjunctival impression cytology, several squamous
metaplasia grading systems based on qualitative or quantitative
cytological criteria are applied. The best-known methods include
the systems by Nelson [291], Tseng [292], and Blades [293]. Among
them, the Nelson classification system, considering the density,
morphology, cytoplasmic staining affinity and nucleus/cytoplasm
ratio of conjunctival epithelial and goblet cells, remains widely
used [294].
6.6.1.3. Lid Parallel Conjunctival Folds (LIPCOF). Lid-parallel
conjunctival folds (LIPCOF) are folds in the lateral, lower quadrant
of the bulbar conjunctiva, parallel to the lower lid margin. LIPCOF
may represent the first mild stages of conjunctivochalasis and thus
share the same aetiology [295], but they display slightly different
characteristics clinically. The cross-sectional area of LIPCOF is much
smaller than that of conjunctivochalasis [227,296]. LIPCOF
[235,297e299] do not occur centrally as does conjunctivochalasis,
and appear unrelated to age [297]. While conjunctivochalasis can
be induced or increased by forceful blinks or digital pressure to￾wards the lid margin or gaze [300], this does not appear to happen
in the case of LIPCOF.
LIPCOF occur behind the temporal and nasal tear meniscus
along 2/3 of the total length of the inferior tear meniscus [203], and
may cause tear meniscus height measurements to be under￾estimated [227]. Decreased mucin production is associated with
the severity of LIPCOF [298], and LIPCOF are significantly correlated
with lid wiper epitheliopathy [235,298]. LIPCOF may be related to
completeness of the blink [301], blink speed and tear film viscosity
[295].
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 550
Patients with increased LIPCOF grades are likely to suffer from
DED [297,302e304]. One study, showed that combining nasal LIP￾COF and NIBUT using an algorithm appeared to be the most pre￾dictive DED test combination [235]. Sensitivity of LIPCOF Sum
(nasal þ temporal LIPCOF) to discriminate between normal and
symptomatic DED patients was reported to be 70%, and specificity
was reported to be 91%, for a cut-off value of 2, using a revised
LIPCOF grading scale (Table 4), where the LIPCOF score is derived
from the number of folds rather than the height of the folds
[298,299,302]. Another group evaluated a medium predictive
ability of temporal LIPCOF using the Hoh et al. fold height-based €
grading scale [297], and defined the cut-off value as 2, giving a
sensitivity of 52% and specificity of 64% [303].
LIPCOF are observed, without fluorescein, on the bulbar con￾junctiva in the area perpendicular to the temporal and nasal limbus,
above the lower lid (temporal and nasal LIPCOF, respectively), with
a slit-lamp microscope using ~25 magnification (Fig. 2)
[298,299,302]. LIPCOF can be classified by different grading scales,
such as a recent scale counting the number of folds [235]. Care must
be taken to differentiate between parallel, permanent, conjunctival
folds (LIPCOF, single folds height ~0.08 mm) and disrupted micro￾folds (height~0.01 mm) [298,299,302,305e307].
Researchers have also used OCT [308,309] and Scheimpflug
photography to observe LIPCOF [297]. Using these instruments,
additional criteria such as cross-sectional area of LIPCOF or LIPCOF
coverage by the tear meniscus can be evaluated [297,308,309].
Conjunctival shrinkage has been proposed as a diagnostic feature of
dry eyes [310],and has been shown to occur more in patients with
dry eye symptoms, less stable tears and with ocular surface stain￾ing, but not those with MGD [311].
6.6.1.4. In vivo confocal imaging. In-vivo confocal microscopy
(IVCM) is a non-invasive technique that allows the evaluation of
signs of ocular surface damage in DED at a cellular level [312,313],
including decreased corneal (apex and lower periphery) [314], and
conjunctival epithelial cell density [315e317], conjunctival squa￾mous metaplasia (increased mean individual epithelial cell area,
decreased nucleocytoplasmic ratio and goblet cell density) [318],
and corneal nerve changes (decreased sub-basal nerve density,
increased tortuosity and increased number of bead-like forma￾tions) [315,317,319e325]. Laser scanning IVCM allows easy identi-
fication of conjunctival goblet cells (although some concerns have
been reported with regard to evaluation of the tarsal region [326]),
suggesting it may be a valuable tool in assessing and monitoring
DED-related ocular surface damage [312,327e330]. The IVCM
approach seems less invasive, but as effective as impression
cytology [318,331], however it has not yet been widely adopted in
clinical practice and its predictive ability in the diagnosis of DED is
unknown.
6.6.1.5. Ocular surface sensitivity. Cochet-Bonnet or non-contact
air-jet esthesiometers have been employed to evaluate ocular sur￾face sensitivity. Loss of corneal sensation can give rise to severe
corneal epithelial disorders such as neurotrophic keratopathy
[332,333]. The palpebral conjunctival sensitivity appears to be
more critical than corneal sensitivity when assessing DED [334].
Corneal esthesiometry is weakly correlated to other DED tests, but
increases with severity of the disease and has achieved a reported
specificity of 96%, but a sensitivity of just 19% [249].
6.6.2. Diagnostic test recommendation and technique
While corneal staining is perhaps a later stage feature of DED,
combination staining with fluorescein and lissamine green instilled
by a moistened and saturated filter paper strip to highlight corneal
and conjunctival/eyelid margin tissue damage, respectively
[272,276,277,279], is recommended as the most appropriate
Table 3
Grading scales for ocular surface staining.
Scale Cornea Conjunctiva Features
van Bijsterveld system [242] 1: few separated spots
2: many separated spots
3: confluent spots
Nasal and temporal zones:
1: few separated spots
2: many separated spots
3: confluent spots
Focus of Sjogren syndrome €
Out of 9
National Eye Institute/Industry
Workshop guidelines [281]
divided into five sectors (central, superior, inferior,
nasal and temporal), each scored 0e3
divided into superior paralimbal,
inferior paralimbal & peripheral
area both nasally & temporally,
each scored 0e3
Total 15 corneal and
9 conjunctival
Collaborative Longitudinal
Evaluation of Keratoconus
(CLEK) schema [282]
divided into five sectors (central, superior, inferior,
nasal and temporal), each scored 0e4 in 0.5 steps
divided into four sectors
(superior, inferior, nasal and
temporal), each scored 0e4
in 0.5 steps
Fluorescein ICC ¼ 0.76
Rose bengal ICC ¼ 0.40
[39]
areaedensity combination
index [284]
area (A0: no punctate staining; A1: >1/3; A2: 1/3 to 2/3;
A3 >2/3) & density (D0: no punctate staining; D1: sparse;
D2: moderate; D3: high with lesion overlap).
NA combined in single index e.g. A2D3
Oxford staining score [283] Fluorescein, lissamine or rose bengal can be used; 0 to
V grade dependent on intensity of punctate staining displayed
pictorially across a combination of the cornea and conjunctiva.
Dots increase on a log scale
between grades
ocular staining score [285] Fluorescein
0: 0 dots
1: 1e5 dots
2: 6e30 dots
3: >30 dots
Lissamine green
0: 0e9 dots
1: 10e32 dots
2: 33e100 dots
3: >100 dots
Fluorescein extra points þ1
for confluent patches, staining
within pupil or filaments
Out of 12
ICC ~0.90 [286]
ICC, intra-class correlation.
Table 4
Example of a LIPCOF grading scale [235].
Grade
No conjunctival folds 0
One permanent and clear parallel fold 1
Two permanent and clear parallel folds, (normally <0.2 mm) 2
More than two permanent and clear parallel folds, (normally 0.2 mm) 3
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 551
diagnostic technique for evaluating ocular surface damage.
Ophthalmic stain strips are registered as medical devices rather
than pharmaceuticals in some countries and lissamine green is not
a licensed product in other countries so it is acknowledged that
access to these dyes in a clinical setting can be challenging; how￾ever, there have been no reported adverse effects, therefore, the
benefits would appear to outweigh any risks.
6.7. Inflammation of the ocular surface
Inflammation is a recognized component of the pathophysio￾logical mechanism of DED [4] and has been proposed to offer a
stable indicator of DED severity [335]. However, inflammation is
not specific to DED and can occur in other ocular or systemic dis￾ease [336,337]. In autoimmune disease, inflammation occurs in the
eye as well as specific sites around the body, for example, the joints
in rheumatoid arthritis. Autoimmune serum markers, including
SSA and SSB are most often evaluated in Sjogren syndrome. Other €
relevant autoimmune diseases include systemic lupus eryth￾ematosis, mixed connective tissue disease, chronic hepatitis, Ste￾vens Johnson syndrome and chronic graft versus host disease
(GVHD). Systemic investigations used to differentially diagnose the
cause of inflammation might involve biopsy of salivary glands, flow
cytometry of peripheral mononuclear blood cells, radiology or
imaging of joints.
6.7.1. Current tests
6.7.1.1. Ocular/conjunctival redness. The most common clinical sign
that is suggestive of ocular surface inflammation is conjunctival
redness [338e340]. This is a consistent sign of conjunctival vascular
dilatation and reactive change to pathological stimuli. It can occur
in any disease with inflammation, not just DED, for example, in
response to chemical injury, infective conjunctivitis or allergic
conjunctivitis. Ocular redness can be easily detected with a pen
torch or standard slit lamp biomicroscopic examination. For the
purpose of diagnosis and documentation of treatment effects, more
quantitative documentation methods using digital imaging analysis
have been developed [341e344].
6.7.1.2. Matrix metalloproteinases. The matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) are one of many classes of proteases secreted into the tears
in DED [174,345e347]. The level of MMPs reflect the loss of ocular
surface barrier function, since MMPs can destroy tight junctions in
the ocular surface epithelium. MMPs are produced as inactive
proenzymes and can be cleaved to become active enzymes. It is
therefore important for an MMP diagnostic test to detect enzyme
activity levels and not just total tear protein levels. One develop￾ment is the availability of a commercial ‘point of care’ diagnostic
device (InflammaDry®, Rapid Pathogen Screening, Inc, Sarasota, FL,
USA) which assays tear MMP-9 levels in 10 min [348]. In its current
form, this assay produces a dichotomous outcome, with levels
above 40 ng/ml producing a positive result, and is non-specific to
the source of ocular surface inflammation.
6.7.1.3. Cytokines and chemokines. The levels of tear cytokines and
chemokines are important and reflect the level of epithelial disease.
Certain cytokines can highlight a specific disease process, for
example, elevation of Th1 and Th17 subclasses of cytokines suggest
involvement of particular T lymphocyte differentiation pathways in
the disease [349]. Elevation of tear Th2 cytokines, on the other
hand, may suggest a more allergic-based disease, although recent
evidence suggests various aspects of T cell Th1, Th2 and Th17 exist
across aqueous deficient, evaporative and mixed forms of DED,
with a propensity towards Th1 type T cell responses as a more
global indicator of DED [350]. Since collection of tear fluid is rela￾tively non-invasive compared to biopsies or venipuncture for
serum assays, it is an attractive idea to include these as diagnostic
tools [174,351].
A recent report on standard operating instructions for the tear
assay of tumor necrosis factor alpha, interferon gamma, IL-1 beta
and IL-6 has been published [352]. This refers to the collection,
storage and repeatability of the tear assay, but with laboratory
testing rather than a ‘point of care’ device. The operating in￾structions could be made even more cost-effective by reducing the
need for reagents [353]. However, it has been found that tear IL-10
and IL-1b levels had significant inter-day variations, while
epidermal growth factor, fractalkine, IP-10 and vascular endothelial
growth factor were consistently higher in the evening compared to
the midday measurements [354]. Such issues will affect how
readily these tests are adopted in routine clinical practice. Tear
chemokines such as CXCL9, -10, -11, and CXCR3 are important in the
tear fluid, as they serve as ligands for specific chemokine receptors
on immune cells [29,355e357]. The elevation of specific ligands
may therefore imply the involvement of the specific lymphocytes in
the ocular surface, without actually measuring the presence of
these lymphocytes.
6.7.1.4. Ocular surface immune markers. The most commonly used
ocular surface immune marker is HLA-DR expression, a Class-II
MHC antigen, which indicates a loss of the normally immune￾suppressed environment of the ocular surface. Epstein has
recently published standard operating instructions for impression
cytology, for use in clinics and in clinical trials [358]. It was reported
that sufficient conjunctival epithelial cells could be harvested for
the quantification of HLA-DR using a suitable impression mem￾brane, for example, the commercially available Eyeprim™ mem￾brane (Opia Technology, Paris, France). The precision/repeatability
of HLA-DR expression was studied and it was noted that collection,
storage and shipment of specimens from distant sites were suc￾cessful and storage of specimens for up to 30 days (with refriger￾ation) before processing did not affect results. Since the centralized
laboratory was able to track large number of masked samples
reliably, the authors suggest that this tool is suitable for use in
randomized controlled trials of DED.
Although the authors found increased expression of HLA-DR
associated with increased clinical severity of DED [358], a com￾parison with six other studies showed that the normal levels of
HLA-DR expression are very variable (ranging from 5% to 54%), and
its correlation with traditional clinical signs of DED is weak [359].
This may suggest that not all DED cases are equally inflammatory,
Fig. 2. LIPCOF degree 2 (Pult Scale) - dashed line indicates the corneal limbus - vertical
perpendicular line indicates the appropriate area for observation.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 552
or that the marker is non-specific for DED and indeed can reflect
any ocular surface inflammation. Nevertheless. use of impression
cytology can be helpful in the documentation of particular immune
cells in specific contexts of DED. For example, the quantification of
neutrophil involvement in Stevens Johnson syndrome has been
published [360]. Other relevant markers of apoptosis include CAM-
1, CD14þ, CD8þ and CD4þ cells [361,362].
6.7.1.5. In vivo confocal imaging. Corneal sub-epithelial and stro￾mal IVCM signs of inflammation have been hypothesized and
studied in DED for over 10 years [363,364]. More recently, IVCM has
allowed examination to be extended to a number of components of
the ocular surface morpho-functional unit [315,365]. Recent liter￾ature has shown significant differences between patients with DED
and controls, and among different types of DED, for many pre￾sumed inflammatory parameters, including corneal dendritic cells
(DC), stromal hyper-reflective (activated) cells [317,320,321,366],
conjunctival hyper-reflective roundish or ovoidal (inflammatory)
cells [316,326,367], and meibomian gland acinar wall and inho￾mogeneous appearance between ‘slices’ (inflammatory infiltration)
[329,368]. Some of these parameters have shown good repeat￾ability and correlate with tear film inflammatory mediators, and
other signs of DED [369]. Inflamed ocular surfaces, in immune￾mediated diseases and in DED, show not only increased DC den￾sity, but also morphological DC changes, which may indicate cell
maturation [364,370]. In recent research, IVCM imaging of DCs in
DED has been able to predict, as well as monitor, the response to
anti-inflammatory drugs [370,371], and to detect sub-clinical
ocular surface inflammation [372].
6.7.2. Diagnostic test recommendation and technique
As described, practitioners need to be aware that the ocular
inflammation tests mentioned are not specific for DED. For a clinical
test to be acceptable, it should be readily performed without
excessive demands on technical manpower or time [373]. For this
reason, research techniques such as mass spectrometry [374,375],
have not been included in this section. The technical challenges
involved in assessment of tear protein levels should not be
underestimated. Only a very minute amount of tears can be
sampled from DED patients, and since the linear range of many
analytes is different, differential dilution of the collected tears may
be necessary. Some of the tests may be problematic when used in a
population without normal reference values. For example, many
tear cytokines and even MMPs tend to increase with age [376], and
age specific upper limits of the normal values have not been pub￾lished, thereby potentially limiting the usefulness of the tools as
diagnostic devices. However, multiplexed cytokine systems are
increasingly becoming available [353]. Currently most practitioners
do not include one of these tests for inflammation as a prerequisite
for clinical diagnosis of DED. Certain clinical tools have been
available for a long time, but the recent availability of a standard
commercial platform, such as the ocular redness index within the
Oculus Keratograph 5M software suggests that tools for measuring
inflammation may now be within reach of many clinicians [340].
With the availability of newer immunosuppressive medications
and trials concerning these drugs [377,378] it is logical that
inflammation should be assessed. The exact modality used may
need to be varied depending on the pathway or target cell upon
which the immunosuppressive drug acts, and such diagnostic tools
should be used for refining patient selection as well as monitoring
after commencement of treatment. Costs of these diagnostic tests
should be considered, but these should be calculated from a holistic
standpoint. For example, if the tests can assist the channelling of
patients to appropriate healthcare services there may be cost sav￾ings for reduced referrals.
6.8. Eyelid aspects
6.8.1. Current tests
6.8.1.1. Anterior. Anterior eyelid features, such as anterior ble￾pharitis and demodex blepharitis, are differential diagnoses and
comorbidities of DED rather than diagnostic criteria and therefore
are discussed in Section 9.
6.8.1.2. Posterior
6.8.1.2.1. Lid wiper epitheliopathy (LWE). A small portion of the
marginal conjunctiva of the upper and lower lid acts as a wiping
surface to spread the tear film over the ocular surface [379,380].
This contacting surface at the lid margin has been termed the 'lid
wiper' [379]. The normal lid wiper is rich in goblet cells [381], and
appears to be the most sensitive conjunctival tissue of the ocular
surface [382]. Lid wiper staining with dyes such as fluorescein and
lissamine green, which occurs principally in DED patients
[298,299,379,383,384], has been termed lid wiper epitheliopathy
(LWE) or upper lid margin staining [379,385,386]. It has been
proposed that LWE is related to increased friction (direct contact
between surfaces) throughout blinks [298,379,383,384], although
modelling of the tribology suggests that tear film viscosity-induced
hydrodynamic forces at the start of each blink are the principal
cause [295]. Boundary lubrication may therefore play a key role in
reducing dry eye [387]. LWE occurs on the upper and lower lids, but
most studies report only upper LWE. Lower LWE in contact lens
wearers has been found to be associated with DED symptoms in
some studies [388], but not others [298,299].
Korb and colleagues reported that 88% of symptomatic patients
had LWE but only 16% of asymptomatic patients presented with
LWE [45]. Shiraishi et al. reported a higher prevalence of LWE in
younger than older contact lens wearers [389]. The predictive
ability of upper LWE is reported to be 48% (sensitivity) and 96%
(specificity) in non-lens wearers using a cut-off value of grade 1
(based on the Korb grading scale; Table 5). In their protocols, Korb
et al. recommend the use of fluorescein and lissamine green in
combination to stain LWE with repeated instillation of lissamine
green before the evaluation of LWE [45,278]. However in another
study, LWE increased following repeated lid eversion, but not dual
instillation [390]. LWE can be observed immediately adjacent to the
lid margin of the everted eyelid using a slit lamp biomicroscope and
is most commonly classified by combining the extent of its staining,
in terms of length in mm, and width relative to the lid margin width
[45,235,278,298,302,379,391]. Another grading system has pro￾posed observing the area and staining pattern [392]. A more
advanced method may be to use confocal microscopy, where small
hyperreflective dots, assumed to highlight inflammation, have been
observed in lens wearers wearing high coefficient of friction lenses
[384].
6.8.1.2.2. Interferometry. Oily substances spread to form a thin
layer on the surface of water. Exposure of such an oily layer to
adequate light results in the generation of an interferometric fringe
pattern from interference from the front and back surface refractive
index change reflections (from the interface with the air and the
muco-aqueous tear film phase respectively). The superficial oily
layer of the tear film is thought to retard evaporation of the tears,
and, with the rest of the tear film, provides an optically smooth
surface over the cornea [148,175,393]. The lipids produced by the
meibomian glands usually distribute dynamically from the inferior
to the superior region over the ocular surface and then stabilize
shortly thereafter [394].
In conjunction with the surface reflection pattern and dy￾namics, interferometry can allow the thickness of the lipid layer
of the tear film to be estimated [148]. Using slit lamp photometry
to measure reflectivity, Olsen first estimated the thickness of the
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 553
lipid layer of the tear film to be approximately 40 nm [395]. Since
this initial analysis, single-wavelength interferometry has been
applied to such measurements [396e399]. Guillon et al. devel￾oped a clinical interferometer (Tearscope; Keeler, Windsor, UK)
that uses broadband illumination to visualize the kinetics of the
lipid layer of the tear film, showing that different patterns of
interferometric fringe are generated according to the lipid layer
thickness [154]. Goto et al. developed an algorithm for quanti￾fying lipid layer thickness from interferometric fringe patterns
[398]. The DR-1 system (Kowa, Nagoya, Japan) was also developed
as an interferometer for evaluation of the kinetics of the lipid
layer of the tear film in both normal subjects and patients with
DED (Fig. 3). This system has revealed that lipid layer kinetics are
related to the tear film condition or blink pattern [398]. Inter￾ferometry is now an established technique for clinical examina￾tion that allows visualization of the kinetics of the oily layer of the
tear film.
The LipiView interferometer (TearScience, Morrisville, NC) was
recently introduced as the first clinically available instrument to
allow automated measurement of the thickness of the lipid layer of
the tear film [153] This instrument has a sensitivity of 65.8% and a
specificity of 63.4% using a cut-off value of 75-nm for the detection
of MGD, but its diagnostic contribution to DED has not been
established [153]. The lateral shearing interferometer has also
recently been introduced for research purposes [400e403]. This
latter system relies on illumination with a helium-neon laser, and
analysis by fast Fourier transform, to evaluate surface irregularities
of the tear film related to breakup of the lipid layer. Such in￾struments are likely to provide new insights into the lipid layer of
the tear film and the pathophysiology of dry eye.
6.8.1.2.3. Meibography. Meibography allows observation of the
silhouette of the meibomian gland morphological structure. The
original technique involved white-light transillumination of ever￾ted eyelids from the skin aspect, with imaging based on black-and￾white film [404], infrared film [405e407], and a near-infrared
charge-coupled device (CCD) video camera [408]. Arita et al.
developed a non-contact, slit lamp mounted meibography system
that relies on an infrared filter and an infrared CCD video camera, in
which imaging is less time-consuming than other systems (Fig. 4)
[409]. Recent advances in technology have led to the development
of several mobile, handheld, pen-shaped and multi-functionality
systems with infrared light-emitting diodes (LEDs) fixed to
infrared cameras that allow the capture of videos and images of
similar quality to those obtained with earlier meibography systems
[410e412].
Several different scoring scales, such as the meiboscore, have
been proposed for the evaluation of meibography
[409,411,413e416]. In addition, quantitative evaluation of meibo￾mian gland area visualized by meibography has been performed
[417e420]. Such quantitative evaluation has been applied to the
diagnosis of MGD [419] as well as to evaluation of the effects of
treatment [421,422]. Meibography alone does not appear to be
sufficient for the diagnosis of MGD, but instead should be inter￾preted in the context of other clinical parameters [411,423e425].
The thickness of the lipid layer of the tear film measured by
interferometry (LipiView) was found to be related to meibomian
gland area determined by meibography [426]. Tear fluid secretion
has also been shown to be positively correlated, as a compensatory
mechanism, with the area devoid of meibomian glands in patients
with MGD [427].
Diagnostic cut-off values for the meiboscore in combination
with symptoms and lid margin abnormalities demonstrated a
sensitivity of 84.9% and specificity of 96.7% for the diagnosis of
MGD, in a study comparing normal eyes with those affected by
obstructive MGD [423]. Meibography scales have been found to be
highly reproducible [413,428], Meibography has revealed that
changes in meibomian gland morphology are less pronounced in
patients with ADDE than EDE [427,429]. However, shortening of
meibomian gland ducts was frequently detected in wearers of
contact lenses who complained of DED symptoms [430]. Estab￾lishing the diagnostic value of meibography in DED requires further
study.
Table 5
LWE grading scale [391].
Horizontal length of staining Grade Sagittal width of staining Grade
<2 mm 0 <25% of the lid wiper 0
2-4 mm 1 25% - <50% of the lid wiper 1
5-9 mm 2 50% - <75% of the lid wiper 2
>10 mm 3  75% of the lid wiper 3
Fig. 3. Interferometric image of the tear film lipid layer in a patient with dry eye. An
abnormal multicolored interferometric fringe is observed. A video of lipid layer im￾aging is also available on the TFOS website.
Fig. 4. Infrared images of the upper and lower eyelids obtained by non-invasive
meibography in a patient with MGD. Hyper-illuminated regions correspond to mei￾bomian glands. Note that dark areas of gland dropout, presumed to indicate gland
atrophy, as well as gland shortening, are apparent.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 554
6.8.1.2.4. Meibomian gland expressibility/duct assessment.
Meibomian glands secrete meibum, which contains components of
the lipid layer of the tear film. Meibum quantity, quality and
expressibility are thought to reflect meibomian gland function. The
expressibility of meibum, as an indicator of meibum secretion, is
commonly determined by the application of digital pressure to the
glands, along the length of the eyelid, through the skin surface of
the eyelid [406,431,432], although more standardized procedures
for expression have been reported [433]. In the normal eyelid,
meibum is clear and readily expressed with gentle pressure.
Conversely, the condition of meibum in patients with MGD is var￾ied. In such individuals, meibum can lose its clarity to become
cloudy and then opaque and its viscosity can be increased,
becoming toothpaste-like and difficult to express in patients with
severe MGD. The ranging qualities of meibum as well as its
expressibility have been evaluated in various grading schemes. The
number and location of expressible glands, as well the response of
the glands to different levels of digitally applied pressure, have thus
been scored and graded, providing information directly related to
meibomian gland condition [416,433e439]. However, the diag￾nostic value of meibomian gland expressibility and duct appear￾ance has not been established in DED.
6.8.1.3. In vivo confocal imaging. IVCM can be used to study the
eyelid margin, to diagnose eyelid mite infestation [440,441], and to
assess meibomian gland changes [329,442]. This technology has
shown diagnostic benefits in obstructive MGD, providing new in￾formation about meibomian gland morphology related to specific
conditions, such as contact lens wear, GVHD and atopic kerato￾conjunctivitis [368,443e447], and could detect the response of
meibomian glands to treatment [448,449].
6.8.1.4. Dynamic
6.8.1.4.1. Blink/lid closure analysis. Blinking is vital in main￾taining optical performance and the health of the ocular surface.
The blinking action clears debris, provides mechanical protection
and re-forms the tear film [107,393,450e459]. Furthermore,
blinking appears to be vital for meibum distribution [460], and in
re-forming a proper tear film lipid layer [450,451,454]. The per￾centage of almost complete blinks is correlated to DED symptoms
and LIPCOF, perhaps due to physical interference with spontaneous
blinks [298,301], and may be related to MG morphology [461].
However, there is a broad spectrum of reported results, between
10% and 80%, for the percentage of incomplete blinks in a popula￾tion of healthy individuals [454,455,462e464]. This may be due to
the different measurement protocols and procedures, or variations
in the visual task, or the eyelid motion detection method.
The normal spontaneous blink rate is reported to occur from 10
to 15 blinks per minute [301,465e467]. It is higher in females than
in males [301,463,464], but the effect of age is controversial
[301,467,468]. Incomplete blinking can result in DED and exposure
keratopathy [301,452,469]. The inter-blink interval is variable be￾tween subjects, is decreased in DED and can be increased with
artificial tear instillation [301,452,470]. However, the blink rate is
also affected by systemic conditions such as Parkinson disease
[471], and tasks such as computer work [472].
Blink speed is faster in the closing phase than the opening phase
and faster for the upper lid than for the lower lid [473]. There
appear to be no correlation between blink speed and either DED
symptoms or tear film stability. However the upper lid velocity is
positively related to LIPCOF [295,473].
Incomplete blinks can result in DED symptoms and corneal
staining observable by slit lamp biomicroscope. Using fluorescein,
the incomplete blink can be highlighted by a “tide line” visible as a
dark line in the fluorescein pattern indicating the lower limit of
movement of the upper eyelid during a recent incomplete blink
[464]. More advanced methods utilise high speed video, possible
now even on smart phones [474], observed from an inferior￾temporal angle [301,475] However appropriate diagnostic cut-off
values and sensitivity and specificity figures still require
investigation.
6.8.1.4.2. Lid sensitivity. Ocular surface sensitivity plays a role in
the maintenance of ocular surface homeostasis. A Cochet-Bonnet
esthesiometer has been applied to evaluate lid sensitivity in
several studies. Norn found that lid sensitivity was intermediate
between corneal sensitivity and conjunctival sensitivity in healthy
subjects [476,477], and others have reported the lower eyelid is
more sensitive than the upper eyelid [478,479]. Lid margin sensi￾tivity was found to be normal in patients with chronic blepharitis or
DED [477]. It thus remains unclear whether lid sensitivity may
show disease-dependent changes or whether it is unaffected in
eyelid disease.
6.8.2. Diagnostic test recommendation and technique
For subtype classifying of DED and to inform appropriate man￾agement, the presence of blepharitis, and their blink rate and
completeness when a patient is performing a task such as
completing a DED questionnaire, unaware that the eye care prac￾titioner is observing them, should be noted. Lipid thickness should
be observed with an interferometric technique and the pattern
graded. Ideally meibography should be performed along with duct
observation and expressibility [480].
7. Monitoring dry eye disease progression and management
Few studies have monitored changes in DED signs and symp￾toms over time. New electronic technologies, such as smartphones
or other handheld devices, have been tested recently to capture
symptom information in “real time” rather than rely on reports
from a recall period, thus aiding patient monitoring [481].
The Women's Health Study and Physicians' Health Study co￾horts, revealed worsening of vision-related symptoms in 29% of the
subjects since diagnosis (on average 10.5 years). In multivariable
logistic regression models for visual symptoms, spending >$20
(USD) per month on DED treatments, presence of a history of severe
DED symptoms, and use of systemic beta-blockers were signifi-
cantly associated with patient-reported visual worsening. Patients
who reported severe symptoms of DED in the past were more likely
to report worsening and to have corneal staining, suggesting that
this might be a clinically relevant indicator of the probability of
visual/OSD progression [482]. More prospective studies monitoring
visual changes during the natural course of DED, and following
treatment, are needed in the future.
8. Clinical protocol for dry eye diagnostic test battery
From Section 6, the recommended diagnostic and monitoring
test battery is collated in Fig. 5. Symptoms and at least one positive
result of the markers of homeostasis listed below should constitute
the diagnosis of DED. If a patient has dry eye symptoms, DED is
diagnosed when at least one homeostasis test result is positive. This
can occur even if the practitioner does not have access to the full
battery of recommended tests. However, if the practitioner has
access to only a limited number of the homestasis marker tests and
these show negative results, a referral may be necessary to confirm
the results of the remaining measures, to which the practitioner
does not have access, before a diagnosis of DED can be excluded.
In situations where there are chronic symptoms but limited
signs, that are refractory to treatment, then neuropathic pain rather
than DED should be considered. Asymptomatic patients with DED
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 555
type signs, unattributable to other conditions via the differential
diagnosis and comorbidities triaging questions in Section 9, might
still warrant prophylactic ocular surface treatment. Videos of these
diagnostic as well as sub-classification techniques of MGD, lipid
thickness/dynamics and tear volume are available on the TFOS
website (https://www.theocularsurfacejournal.com).
Tables of severity describing several signs and symptoms and
(often arbitrary) cut-offs for different levels are of limited use, as
features of dry eye often do not show strong association. Hence it is
recommended that severity, for the purpose of selecting treatment,
is based on subtype classification features (MGD, lipid thickness/
dynamics and non-invasive tear volume) along with
symptomology.
The recommended order and clinical practice procedural rec￾ommendations are as follows:
8.1. Symptoms
DEQ-5 (Fig. 6a) or OSDI (Fig. 6b) e self-administered [35,37].
Positive result is a DEQ-5 score  6 [37], or OSDI score  13 [35].
8.2. Tear breakup time
8.2.1. Non-invasive breakup time
Non-invasive breakup time should be performed with a method
where as much of the naturally exposed cornea as possible is
specularly illuminated with a light source allowing observation of
breakup over the whole surface, after a blink. Objective methods
are preferred, with three measurements being performed and the
median value recorded. Following training, if a patient can no
longer refrain from blinking before the tear film breaks up, this is
typically counted as the breakup time for that measurement [194].
The lower median breakup value of the two eyes should be
considered in making the diagnosis. The cut-off for a positive
finding can be as low as 2.7 s for automated algorithms [142], and
up to 10 s for subjective observation techniques [134].
8.2.2. FBUT
FBUT can be considered when non-invasive techniques are not
available, but due to its more invasive nature, should follow after
osmolarity measurement. Fluorescein should be instilled at the
Fig. 5. DED diagnostic test battery. The screening DEQ-5 or OSDI confirms that a patient might have DED and triggers diagnostic testing of non-invasive breakup time, osmolarity
[measured prior to breakup time if FBUT used] and ocular surface staining with fluorescein and lissamine green (observing the cornea, conjunctiva and eyelid margin). On initial
diagnosis, it is important to exclude conditions that can mimic DED with the aid of the triaging questions (Section 9) and to assess the risk factors which may inform management
options [380]. Marked symptoms in the absence of clinically observable signs might suggest an element of neuropathic pain. DED is a subset of OSD; signs alone may still warrant
management to prevent DED manifestation and to optimise the optical corneal surface such as prior to refractive surgery or contact lens wear [4]. MGD features [483], lipid
thickness/dynamics, and tear volume assessment, and their severity inform the subtype classification of DED as predominantly evaporative or predominantly aqueous deficient
which helps inform the management of DED. In accordance with the recommendations of the MGD Workshop (2011) [483], MILD MGD is indicated by a secretion grade 4-7, an
expressibility grade of 1 and an amorphous/color fringe lipid pattern. MODERATE MGD is indicated by meibomian gland orifice plugging, lid margin vascularity, a secretion grade 8-
12, an expressibility grade of 2 and a meshwork or wave (flow) lipid pattern. SEVERE MGD is indicated by lid margin meibomian gland orifice drop-out or displacement, a secretion
grade  13, an expressibility grade of 3 and an absent, globular or abnormal color fringe lipid pattern. Videos of these diagnostic and sub-classification techniques are available on
the TFOS website. Sjogren syndrome should be suspected if the DEQ-5 score is € > 12. Further testing will help identify treatment mechanisms worthy of targeting, but are beyond the
scope of this Diagnostic Methodology report.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 556
outer canthus to avoid ocular surface damage (see Section 8.4.1 for
instillation instructions), with the excess saline on the strip shaken
off, or a reduced area fluorescein strip used [118]. For optimal re￾sults, viewing should take place between 1 and 3 min after instil￾lation [279]. A positive finding has been reported to be a
value < 10 s [13] although in some studies the average in healthy
middle aged patients is noted to be lower than this [244].
8.3. Osmolarity
Osmolarity should be assessed with a temperature stabilised,
calibration checked device. In the case of the Tearlab, temperature
stability is achieved by having the device powered on for a suffi-
cient period of time with test cards adjacent to the device for at
least 30 min. Seat the patient with chin tilted upward and eyes
directed toward the ceiling. Place one hand on the face for
stabilization, as appropriate. Do not pull the eyelid down or away
from the eye. Sample from just above the lower eyelid tear
meniscus, being careful not to press inward to avoid contact with
the globe during collection. The difference between the eyes as well
as the absolute measures can be diagnostic [170,171]. A positive
result is considered to be  308 mOsm/L with the currently avail￾able device in either eye [13,15], or an interocular difference >8
mOsm/L [171].
8.4. Ocular surface staining
8.4.1. Lissamine green staining
Principally for assessing conjunctival and lid margin damage, a
lissamine green strip is wet with saline, with the whole drop
retained on the strip for at least 5 s to elute the dye. A 10 mL or ~ ¼ to
½ of a drop appears to be an optimal volume if pipetting a
Fig. 6a. Five-item Dry Eye Questionnaire (DEQ-5) reproduced with permission (Indiana University) [37].
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 557
predetermined concentration solution [272,280]. Otherwise, a drop
from the strip is instilled inside the far lower temporal lid in upgaze
with the lower eyelid of the eye pulled slightly temporally to avoid
damage to the conjunctival or lid wiper tissue (Fig. 7). Studies have
suggested that observation should occur between 1 and 4 min post￾instillation, and that observation through a red filter potentially
aids visualization [272,280]. A positive score is > 9 conjunctival
spots [285].
8.4.2. Fluorescein staining
Principally for assessing corneal damage, fluorescein should be
instilled in a similar way, but with the excess saline on the strip
shaken off to instil a minimal volume. Optimal viewing is between
1 and 3 min after instillation [279]. A positive result is > 5 corneal
spots [285].
Lid wiper epitheliopathy can be observed stained with fluores￾cein, rose bengal or lissamine green dyes, although there seems to
be a preference for just lissamine green in recent research, with
viewing recommended 3e6 min after repeat instillation using 2
separate strips wet with 2 saline drops [484]. Positive is LWE of 
2 mm in length and/or  25% sagittal width (excluding Marx's line)
[391].
Fig. 6b. Ocular Surface Disease Index (OSDI©) Version 1 Permission received. Copyright 1995 Allergan Inc. Irvine, CA, USA. All rights reserved.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 558
DED severity can change with the time of day so this should be
considered in interpreting results and in monitoring DED over time
[485,486].
9. Differential diagnosis & comorbidities
Based on the conditions that can mimic the signs and symp￾toms of DED outlined in the subsections below, administering a
series of questions (Table 6) will aid in the differential diagnosis.
While further investigation of possible comorbidities should not
negate immediate relief management of DED-type symptoms,
failing to fully investigate possible comorbidities can lead to non￾optimized treatment and the delayed diagnosis of causative
conditions that could have serious consequences, such as the
higher risk of malignancy in Sjogren syndrome € [487]. If ques￾tioning by non-eye care professionals suggests DED, but recom￾mended treatments do not result in a marked improvement in
symptoms within about a one-month period, a detailed eye ex￾amination is recommended.
For those patients where the history-taking for differential
diagnosis suggests that this might not be primary DED, a full dif￾ferential diagnosis should be performed using a slit lamp bio￾microscope to examine the:

eyelashes for both anterior blepharitis and signs of demodex
infestation

eyelid palpebral conjunctiva for MGD and the presence of fol￾licles or swelling

bulbar conjunctiva for redness pattern and signs of swelling

cornea for ulceration, and staining should be applied to detect
possible trauma

anterior chamber for the presence of cells or flare, indicating
intraocular inflammation
9.1. Conjunctivitis
9.1.1. Allergic conjunctivitis
Symptoms of DED may be very similar to those of allergic
conjunctivitis and the conditions can occur simultaneously [380].
In one study of 689 patients with Sjogren Syndrome, clinically
Table 6
Initial questions for the differential diagnosis of DED, indicating where more detailed observation of the ocular surface and adnexa is warranted. Medications which can cause
DED are noted in the TFOS DEWS II Epidemiology report [57]. Sjogren syndrome is a subtype of DED, but is included in the differential diagnosis questioning to ensure it is €
considered from the outset.
Fig. 7. Recommended location to apply ophthalmic dyes in strip form to avoid con￾founding damage to the conjunctiva and lid margins observed for the diagnosis of DED
and its sub-classification. See video on TFOS website for further guidance.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 559
significant itching was found in 194 (28.2%) cases; DED was re￾ported to be a symptom in 247 (35.8%) cases; and redness was
documented in 194 (28.2%) cases [487]. Systemically, the pres￾ence of immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies to seasonal or
perennial allergens can be documented in most cases of allergic
conjunctivitis [488], and there are now some diagnostic tests
available to indicate the presence of IgE biomarkers in the tear
film or on the ocular surface. In addition, classical allergic
conjunctivitis clinical findings, such as conjunctival chemosis,
eyelid edema and conjunctival papillae, differentiate allergic from
DED [489,490]. Also, allergic rhinitis is present in more than 80%
of ocular allergy cases [491,492], but is not a symptom known to
be associated with DED. Other findings frequently detected in
allergy include a strong family history, atopic dermatitis and/or
the presence of asthma [493]. Common oral pharmaceutical
agents for allergy treatment have a significant drying effect on the
ocular surface and may actually induce DED in patients [494,495].
A diminished tear volume, in turn, permits allergens to remain on
the surface longer and may induce or exacerbate allergic
conjunctivitis [496].
Giant papillary conjunctivitis (GPC) is associated with trauma to
the upper tarsal plate. Contact lens wear is the primary contributor,
although an exposed suture following a corneal transplant, a
foreign body or ocular prosthesis also could induce GPC [497].
Symptoms of GPC and DED can overlap, including discomfort,
decreased contact lens wear time and mucin discharge. The key
differentiating findings include large upper tarsal papillae and hy￾peremia with usually minimal corneal or bulbar conjunctival
involvement [497]. Further, in most instances, the cause of the
trauma usually is identifiable.
Atopic keratoconjunctivitis (AKC) is a chronic and potentially se￾vere, visually threatening form of allergic eye disease. As AKC is a
bilateral, chronic, inflammatory disease, the signs and symptoms
may be similar, and DED may actually be present in many of these
patients. Additionally, signs of inflammation are noted on the
cornea, conjunctiva and eyelids. Common symptoms include
photophobia, burning, tearing, itching, mucoid discharge, and
eyelid hyperemia and hypertrophy, often with greater lower eyelid
involvement. Some of the more common signs that are found in
both AKC and DED include SPK, conjunctival injection or hyper￾emia, blepharitis/MGD and tear dysfunction [498e501]. The OSD in
AKC patients is characterized by greater epithelial damage and SPK
[502]. Prolonged inflammation plays an important role in the
progression of OSD in patients with longstanding, active AKC [415].
The hallmark findings of AKC that may help differentiate it from
DED include conjunctivitis (potentially cicatrizing), periorbital
eczema [503], corneal neovascularization that could lead to even￾tual conjunctivalization of the cornea, symblepharon, keratoconus
and anterior polar cataracts [504,505]. Other key findings that may
aid in the differential diagnosis include a strong family history of
multiple allergies, atopic dermatitis, the presence of asthma and
periorbital eczema [506]. In fact, it is estimated that atopic
dermatitis and asthma are present in 95% and 87% of AKC patients,
respectively [497].
Vernal keratoconjunctivitis (VKC) causes rapid fluorescein
breakup time, SPK associated with sodium fluorescein staining and
increased conjunctival lissamine green staining [507]. Patients with
VKC often report severe symptoms, including intense itching,
burning, epiphora, conjunctival injection and photophobia
[508,509]. Clinically, VKC is associated with the presence of large
cobblestone papillae and/or Horner-Trantas dots [510]. The condi￾tion can lead to debilitating corneal damage, including shield ulcers
and scarring. Another key differentiator from DED is that this
condition tends to occur in younger male patientsdmost notably
those under age 18 [511].
9.1.2. Viral conjunctivitis
Viral conjunctivitis is a relatively common presentation that
affects patients of all ages, including the ages during which DED is
most frequent. The majority of viral conjunctivitis cases involve the
highly contagious adenovirus (65e90%) [512]. Adenovirus is
capable of surviving for long periods on environmental surfaces
and takes a long time to shed, giving it an incubation period of 4e10
days before it is clinically observable [513]. In addition to the two
types of adenovirus; pharyngoconjunctival fever (PCF) and
epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC), other viral conjunctivitis
causes include herpes viruses, picornaviruses, and several systemic
viral infections.
Although viral conjunctivitis has a number of findings in com￾mon with DED, such as tearing, burning, redness, irritation,
photophobia and blurred vision, a number of differentiating factors
also exist. Patients with viral conjunctivitis usually experience
redness and irritation in one eye initially, often spreading to the
fellow eye within a few days. When asked, patients also often
report recent upper respiratory tract infection or close contact with
someone with a red eye. Morning crusting is also common. Exam
findings usually reveal a watery, mucoid discharge and red,
edematous lids. Preauricular lymphadenopathy is also commonly
present [514].
The term EKC is used when adenoviral eye infections invade the
cornea. EKC, in particular, tends to be accompanied by periorbital
edema and significant inflammation that may also involve the
extraocular muscles. A follicular response is often noted on the
palpebral conjunctiva. Early stage EKC presents with positive pre￾auricular lymphadenopathy on the ipsilateral side to the eye that
first manifested the conjunctivitis. Approximately one week later,
the cornea typically exhibits sub-epithelial infiltrates, which ac￾count for symptoms of irritation and pain, often leading to
decreased visual acuity that can last months or even years after the
infection subsides [513].
PCF is a highly infectious illness with systemic symptoms
including sweats, sore throat, fever and headache. Myalgia, malaise,
pharyngitis, and gastrointestinal disturbances also are typical in
patients with PCF. Upper respiratory tract symptoms may precede
ocular findings, but not in all cases. Acute follicular conjunctivitis
and regional lymphoid hyperplasia with tender, enlarged preaur￾icular lymph nodes are often also found in patients with PCF. PCF is
most commonly observed in children and in groups living in close
quarters, such as schools, prisons, ships, military bases and families.
It is self-limiting and often dissipates within a week [514].
Herpes viruses that cause conjunctivitis include the herpes
simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, which also causes chickenpox
and shingles, and Epstein-Barr virus, which also causes infectious
mononucleosis. Herpes simplex virus in its primary form typically
affects children and presents as a unilateral red eye. It is sometimes
accompanied by a vesicular rash around the eyelid area. In the
absence of ulceration or vesicles, herpes infection can be more
difficult to diagnose. Secondary herpes simplex virus forms typi￾cally involve some form of keratitis in addition to the conjunctivitis.
Interestingly, research suggests that dry eye is a stressor that may
contribute to stromal keratitis in patients who have herpes simplex
[515]. Herpes zoster conjunctivitis is also unilateral and typically is
accompanied by a rash that involves pustules, vesicles and edema/
hyperemia of the surrounding skin, respecting the midline.
Conjunctivitis sometimes precedes the appearance of lesions,
making diagnosis more challenging in patients with this inflam￾matory condition [516].
The Epstein-Barr virus infects >90% of the population [517].
Initial exposure generally occurs during infancy or early childhood
and produces subclinical infection. However, if exposure occurs in
adolescence, it often manifests as infectious mononucleosis.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 560
Epstein-Barr virus infection of ocular structures most often results
in transient follicular conjunctivitis [518] but can also manifest as
DED, keratitis, uveitis, choroiditis, retinitis, oculoglandular syn￾drome, papillitis, and ophthalmoplegia [519]. Picornaviruses, such
as enterovirus 70 and coxsackievirus A24, are highly contagious
and often are the cause of epidemics. Like adenoviral conjunctivitis,
picornaviruses cause an acute hemorrhagic response, although the
clinical appearance is usually more severe. A number of systemic
virusesdincluding as rubeola (measles), rubella (German measles),
mumps, and influenza also frequently involve conjunctival infec￾tion [514]. In cases where clarification is desired, diagnostic tests
with high sensitivity and specificity can help identify forms of viral
conjunctivitis in minutes [520].
9.1.3. Bacterial conjunctivitis
Acute bacterial conjunctivitis is less common than viral and
allergic conjunctivitis, but also shares several findings in common
with DED. Bacterial conjunctivitis can affect patients of any age, but
is most commonly found in children [521]. In adults, the more
common culprits are gram-positive organisms such as staphylo￾coccus, while in children bacterial conjunctivitis tends to be caused
by Haemophilus influenzae and streptococcus species, with more
than one causative organism in some cases [521]. As with DED,
patients who have bacterial conjunctivitis may complain of irrita￾tion, foreign body sensation, burning, stinging and photophobia.
However, they are often most concerned with the redness and
discharge. Symptoms of bacterial conjunctivitis usually include a
greater degree of conjunctival injection compared to conjunctivitis
caused by viruses or DED. Also the discharge is wet and muco￾purulent, rather than dry and crusty, and patients often complain of
matting or adherence of the eyelids, especially in the morning.
Bacterial conjunctivitis can be can be unilateral or bilateral and can
sometimes be accompanied by systemic findings, especially in
children. Systemic symptoms might include fever, malaise, puru￾lent rhinorrhea and a respiratory infection. Otitis media is also
common in children and is highly indicative of H. influenzae
infection [522]. In some cases, bacterial conjunctivitis is accompa￾nied by a red sheen around the eyelids, which is indicative of
preseptal cellulitis.
9.2. Anterior blepharitis
Inflammation of the eyelids can result from infection by, or
allergic reaction to, external agents. The clinical features of ble￾pharitis include redness, exanthema, sores, eschar, swelling, and
bullous formation. Blepharitis is classified according to its anatomic
location. Anterior blepharitis affects the base of the eyelashes,
eyelash follicles, and/or eyelid skin. Inflammation of follicles is
categorized as marginal blepharitis, whereas that of eyelid skin is
blepharo-dermatitis. The pathogenesis of anterior blepharitis is
infectious or noninfectious in nature, and so the location and cause
of the condition should be considered for diagnosis [523]. Clinical
features of anterior blepharitis often overlap those of DED [524].
Recurrent or persistent blepharitis can cause DED, thus observation
of the eyelid is important for adequate diagnosis of DED. The tear
meniscus, tear film breakup time and pattern, foamy discharge and
debris in the tear film should be observed [524], along with the
eyelid position (i.e., ectropion and entropion), eyelid closure (i.e.,
lagophthalmos), blink response and the anterior eyelid margin
(noting any collarettes around eyelashes). Staphylococcal or seb￾orrheic anterior blepharitis are linked to ADDE [482,524] in
50e75% of cases [525,526], perhaps due to the decreased tear
volume supporting less lysozyme or immunoglobulins [526].
Definitive diagnosis is made by identification of the responsible
microorganism or allergen. There are no specific clinical diagnostic
tests for blepharitis. However, cultures of the eyelid margins may
be indicated for patients who have recurrent anterior blepharitis
with severe inflammation as well as for patients who are not
responding to therapy [524].
9.3. Demodex
Demodex mites are common elongated microscopic ectopara￾sites that live on the surface of the human body. Demodex infes￾tation is related to age with 84% of the population at age 60 and
100% of those older than 70 years exhibiting Demodex infestation
[527]. Demodex can spread from the face to the eyelids, perhaps
leading to blepharitis and also rosacea [527e530], which may be
the link between DED and meibomian gland dysfunction
[528,531e533]. However Demodex infestation can also be found in
asymptomatic patients [529]. Contact lens wearers do not show
higher rates of Demodex infestation than non-wearers, but the
relationship with DED symptoms and signs has not been investi￾gated [534]. Two species, Demodex folliculorum and Demodex brevis
have been identified in human eyelids [529,535,536]. Demodex
folliculorum are typically found in the lash follicles of the eyelids,
whereas Demodex brevis burrow deep into sebaceous and meibo￾mian glands. Sebum is thought to be their main food source and
Demodex mites may consume follicular and glandular epithelial
cells, which may lead to direct damage of the lid margin [529].
Demodex mites can cause blepharitis by carrying bacteria on their
surface including streptococci and staphylococci [529,537]. Also the
protein inside the Demodex mites and their waste products may
trigger inflammatory responses, likely via a delayed hypersensi￾tivity or an innate immune response [538]. Demodex-based lid
margin inflammation may result in blepharoconjunctivitis [529].
Proper treatment of ocular demodicosis may resolve blephar￾oconjunctivitis in adults [529,539], however its role in children
remains unclear [529]. Severe cases of demodex with inflamed lid
margins can affect the cornea [529,540].
Demodex can sometimes be observed in situ with high magni-
fication slit lamp microscopy, on epilated lashes using standard
light microscopy or using more advanced techniques, such as IVCM
[329,440,528,529,541]. Liu et al. [529] recommend the following
clinical procedure based on a comprehensive literature review:
1. Clinical history: high index of suspicion when blepharitis,
conjunctivitis or keratitis in adult patients or blephar￾oconjunctivitis or recurrent chalazia in young patients are re￾fractory to conventional treatments, or when there is madarosis
or recurrent trichiasis.
2. Slit-lamp examination: typical cylindrical dandruff at the root of
eyelashes.
3. Microscopic confirmation: detection and counting of Demodex
eggs, lavae and adult mites on epilated lashes.
To avoid epilating eyelashes it has also been reported that
Demodex leave the follicle and are visible by slit lamp microscopy
after gentle tension is applied to the lash and the lash manually
rotated with forceps, encouraging exodus of the mites and allowing
the lash to “scrape out” Demodex deep within the follicle [542]. As
Demodex infestation can also occur in non-DED patients [527], its
diagnostic contribution is limited.
9.4. Parasitic infections
Chlamydia is an obligate intracellular parasite and one of the
most common sexually transmitted infections [543]. Trachoma (or
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 561
granular conjunctivitis) is caused by chlamydia trachomatis which
results in inflammation, corneal inflammation and scarring of the
conjunctiva, obliterating the meibomian gland ductules and goblet
cells, and inducing DED complications [544]. A genital infection
with chalmydia trachomatis is also the main predisposing factor for
adult inclusion conjunctivitis, which is most common in young
adults who are usually asymptomatic. The key differential signs
from typical DED include the generally unilateral infectious nature,
which can be accompanied by corneal ulcers, subepithelial in-
filtrates or opacity, superior epithelial keratitis, superior pannus,
conjunctival scarring, mucopurlent discharge and follicles.
9.5. Corneal and conjunctival abnormalities
The corneal epithelial barrier can be compromised in the setting
of DED, and manifest clinically as punctate epithelial keratopathy/
erosions by fluorescein staining, most prominently in the inter￾palpebral zone. Other epithelial changes in DED can include fila￾ments, epithelial ridges and, in late stages, keratinization. The
epithelial barrier integrity, however, can be compromised due to
other non-DED etiologies, which can also lead to epithelial changes
and corneal fluorescein staining (Table 7). These conditions often
co-exist with DED and may contribute to the OSD. It can sometimes
be challenging to determine whether the main underlying reason
for the epithelial disease is DED, another etiology, or both.
Certain clinical features help to distinguish these other epithe￾lial abnormalities from those that are directly related to the loss of
tear film homeostasis. The history is sometimes helpful; particu￾larly, patients who might have a history of contact lens wear [545],
use of multiple eye drops or exposure to toxic chemical agents
[495,546]. More importantly, the clinical examination often pro￾vides additional information to alert the clinician. Specifically, the
pattern and location of the epithelial changes (particularly fluo￾rescein staining) can provide critical diagnostic clues that help
distinguish DED from other alternative (or concomitant) conditions
affecting the corneal epithelium. For instance, fluorescein staining
in a “whorl” pattern can be seen in the setting of epithelial stress
(such as toxicity from medications) [495] or conjunctivalization of
the cornea due to limbal stem cell deficiency [545,547]. Likewise,
fluorescein staining in the superior cornea, which is not typical for
DED, may be seen in conditions such as superior limbic kerato￾conjunctivitis [548], floppy eyelid syndrome [549], and contact lens
wear [545].
Conjunctival disease may be another co-morbid condition in
patients with DED. One important disorder that can symptomati￾cally mimic DED, and often co-exist and contribute to the patient's
tear film instability, is conjunctivochalasis [550,551]. In addition to
the clinical findings, the lack of response to standard DED therapies
further raises the suspicion and the need to address this co-existing
condition. Other critical signs of co-existing conjunctival disease
are cicatricial changes (sub-epithelial scarring, fornix foreshorten￾ing, cicatricial entropion/trichiasis, and in later stages
symblepharon and keratinization) [380,552]. These findings may
be a manifestation of underlying systemic diseases such as mucous
membrane pemphigoid (also known as ocular cicatricial pemphi￾goid) and chronic Stevens-Johnson syndrome [552e554]. While
these conditions universally have dry eyes as part of the clinical
picture, an early diagnosis is critical, as the management often re￾quires more advanced therapies including systemic immunomod￾ulatory therapy.
9.6. Filamentary and other keratitis, and keratopathies
Filamentary keratitis is generally a chronic corneal condition,
characterized by fine strands of degenerated epithelial cells and
mucus attached to the cornea at one or both ends [555]. Patients
often experience foreign body sensation, grittiness, discomfort,
photophobia, blepharospasm, and increased blinking. ADDE is the
most common ocular condition associated with filamentary kera￾titis and best-practice management involves treating the underly￾ing DED and potential mechanical removal of the corneal filaments
[556]. Interstitial keratitis is any non-ulcerating inflammation of
the corneal stroma, often with vascularisation, but without
involvement of either the epithelium or endothelium. The under￾lying causes are generally infectious or immune-mediated [557].
Neurotrophic keratitis from dysfunction of the ophthalmic division
of the trigeminal nerve caused by conditions such as diabetes
mellitus, ocular herpes simplex, neoplasia, and ophthalmic surgery
is associated with reduced aqueous production [558]. However,
treatment after the early stages of the disease can require more
radical treatment than primary DED such as antibiotics, antivirals,
autologous serum and steroids [559]. Bullous keratopathy is a
pathological condition in which small vesicles, or bullae, form in
the cornea due to endothelial dysfunction. These blister-like for￾mations can undergo painful ruptures and disrupt vision. Treat￾ments include hyperosmotic eye drops to reduce swelling (5%
sodium chloride), amniotic membranes, bandage contact lenses to
reduce discomfort, antiglaucoma medications to reduce the flow of
fluid into the cornea, and corneal transplantation to replace the
damaged tissue [560]. Hence while filamentary and other keratitis,
and keratopathies can mimic some of the signs of DED, slit lamp
detection of vascularisation, anterior chamber cells and flare, and
stromal edema generally set them apart from primary DED.
9.7. Rheumatological conditions
Eye involvement is common in patients with systemic autoim￾mune diseases, particularly rheumatoid arthritis, Sjogren syn- €
drome, seronegative spondyloarthropathy, and antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody-associated vasculitis. The eye is a privileged
immune site, but commensal bacteria are found on the ocular
surface. Eye injury may be inflammatory, vascular or infectious, as
well as iatrogenic, but DED can also be a presenting symptom. Over
half of newly presenting DED cases to a tertiary centre were
Table 7
Common causes of corneal epithelial abnormalities.
Epithelial Trauma lid margin keratinization, trichiasis/entropion, foreign body, superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis, floppy eyelid, contact lens
wear (including hypoxia)
Epithelial Toxicity preservatives from topical medications; such as glaucoma drops, vidarabine; mitomycin-C; fluorouracil (5-FU); other
chemical/environmental exposure
Limbal Stem Cell Disease autoimmune diseases (Stevens-Johnson syndrome, mucous membrane pemphigoid), contact lens wear,
chemical injury, aniridia, ectodermal dysplasia
Epithelial Dystrophies epithelial basement membrane dystrophy. Meesman's dystrophy
Conjunctival Scarring mucous membrane pemphigoid, chronic Stevens-Johnson syndrome, chronic atopic keratoconjunctivitis
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 562
secondary to a known (48%) or undiagnosed (5%) inflammatory
disease, primary thyroid disorder, Sjogren syndrome or rheumatoid €
arthritis [561]. Sjogren syndrome is considered a sub-classi € fication
of DED [380], but requires specific diagnostic differentiation from
other forms of DED to facilitate appropriate interdisciplinary
treatment and allow monitoring of potentially life-threatening
complications. Unfortunately the average time to diagnose pri￾mary Sjogren syndrome from symptom onset is 6.5 years € [562],
despite being an independent risk factor for non-Hodgkin lym￾phoma [563], and the most highly associated risk factor among all
rheumatic diseases for malignancy [487]. The revised international
classification criteria for Sjogren syndrome, by the American- €
European Consensus Group Criteria, 2002 [245,564] includes one
criterion of daily feeling of dry mouth for more than 3 months,
recurrent or persistent swollen salivary glands as an adult, or a need
to drink liquids to aid swallowing dry food, thus any of these
symptoms in a patient reporting DED should instigate a referral.
There are also now serological biomarker tests for Sjogren syn- €
drome [565]. It should be noted that tests not recommended for the
diagnosis of DED, such as the Schirmer test, are still recommended
for the diagnosis of Sjogren syndrome € [245].
9.8. Lid related disease
Lid related disease such as chalazion or infectious hordeolum,
may result in DED symptoms. Other eyelid conditions such as
anterior blepharitis and MGD can inform the management of DED
and therefore the eyelid should always be carefully observed when
DED is investigated.
9.9. Visual asthenopia
General symptoms of visual discomfort may include those
linked to DED [566]. DED is the predominant cause of computer
vision syndrome [567], resulting in the reporting of general visual
symptoms after prolonged use of digital screens compared to
equivalent paper copy tasks [568]. Incomplete blinks rather than a
reduction in blink rate appears to be associated with these symp￾toms [569]. Differentiation from primary DED is on the basis of
history informed triggers of dryness and more general symptoms
such as the eyes being tired, hurting, feeling heavy, burning,
straining, stinging and experiencing photophobia [91].
9.10. Graft versus host disease (GVHD)
GVHD is an immune-mediated inflammatory disease that occurs
following allogeneic hematological stem cell transplantation and
causes destruction of host tissues by immunocompetent cells from
the donor. Typical ocular complications in the acute form of the
condition are pseudomembranous conjunctivitis and acute hem￾orrhagic conjunctivitis in 12e17% of cases [570,571], whereas
60e90% with the chronic form develop ocular symptoms of DED
[572], perhaps due to tear fluid levels of receptor agonist IL-8/
CXCL8 and interferon inducible protein IP-10/CXCL10 [28]. Ocular
symptoms can be minimised by a stepwise approach to treatment
involving topical anti-inflammatory medications and autologous
serum tears, but patients must be monitored closely, as they are
prone to serious ocular complications such as corneal perforation
and endophthalmitis [573].
9.11. Contact lenses
Contact lenses can induce dry eyes (termed CLIDE) and appro￾priate management strategies should be employed to minimize
these [495,574]. This should be distinguished from people who
have diagnosed primary DED and wish to wear contact lenses
where, as well as the selection of lens modality and material, non￾preserved DED treatments should be considered [377].
9.12. Psychological factors
Concomitant psychosocial issues have been associated with
DED. Patients with DED have been shown to have increased prev￾alence of sleep and mood disorders [575]. Anxiety and depression
have also been reported with increased frequency in DED patients
in a variety of studies [576e578]. In one population-based cross￾sectional study, of over 6000 women, these findings were similarly
confirmed. Subjects with a diagnosis of DED were more likely to
experience severe psychological stress [odds ratio (OR) 2.5],
depressive mood [OR 1.5], and anxiety [OR 1.5] [579]. In another
large series of over 7000 DED patients, the adjusted OR of DED and
anxiety was 2.8 and DED and the OR for depression was 2.9 [580].
Beyond depression and anxiety, it has been suggested that DED can
lead to neuropathic ocular pain and this has been shown to occur
with greater frequency in patients who also have comorbid chronic
pain syndromes [333,581]. Post-traumatic stress disorder has also
been associated with DED and may have a link via treatment
medication use or the underlying disease process [61,582].
Neuropathic pain can be differentiated from a disease mechanism
through the use of anaesthetic [583], although this has not been
reported in relation to DED symptoms.
Specialized forms of DED, such as Sjogren syndrome, has been €
associated with cognitive and mood disorders [584]. Signs of these
disorders signify central nervous system involvement, which is an
emerging area within Sjogren syndrome understanding. Other €
studies have noted that patients with Sjogren syndrome self-report €
greater fatigue and depression, however when compared to
matched controls showed no greater dysfunction on objective tests
of cognition and psychomotor function [585]. Hence, a patient's
perception of disease and function can be powerful. Health-related
quality of life has been studied in Sjogren syndrome, showing that €
these patients often worry about the consequences of their illness
[586].
10. Emerging technologies
Lab-on-a-chip systems capable of evaluating multiple bio￾markers simultaneously are being developed by several companies
and hold promise for the differential diagnosis of DED as well as
systemic diseases [587]. While regulators to date have shown
reluctance in approving diagnostic panels in the case of OSD, the
availability of these technologies are anticipated to be of trans￾formative value to the ophthalmic communities. Future de￾velopments will include the creation of a multiplex tear assay
device that incorporates the collection and handling of sub￾microliter amounts of tear [588,589]. Since ocular surface oxida￾tive stress is an important trigger of inflammation [590], another
exciting development would be the evaluation of diagnostic tools
for the assessment of reactive oxygen species or oxidised products
in DED. Technology is needed to determine key pathophysiological
indicators of dry eye, such as osmolarity and inflammation, over the
whole ocular surface in real-time within the inter-blink interval to
better understand the predicated localized changes and how they
impact DED [591].
An additional non-invasive assessment of tear film stability has
been proposed by Varikooty et al. [592] Using this technique, tear
film spread and stability is quantified through the measurement of
tear film particle dynamics. Video recordings are made using a slit
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 563
lamp over a ten second period and customized software allows the
velocity of particles in the tear film to be calculated. How well the
particles move, depends on the ease of spread of the tear film across
the ocular surface and interactions between the different layers of
the tear film.
Although not yet widely used in DED, IVCM is an emerging
technology that appears to have several potential applications in
research and in clinical practice and might prove to be a good
candidate to develop and to validate predictive biomarkers and
surrogate endpoints for clinical research on DED. DED can cause
corneal damage and the reverse can also occur [593].
11. Summary and conclusions
The report has determined, through scientific evidence and
consensus, the most appropriate (efficacious) battery of tests to
diagnose and monitor DED (Fig. 5), as per the revised definition [4].
The most appropriate test order and techniques to conduct these
tests in a clinical setting have been identified, if the triaging
questions (Table 6) do not identify a possible different diagnosis
which needs further investigation first. Critical, diagnostic tests
(symptoms, NIBUT, osmolarity and corneal/conjunctival/lid margin
staining) have been differentiated from tests that inform subtype
classification aetiologies (MGD imaging/observation and expres￾sion, lipid thickness, and tear volume tests).
Financial disclosures
J. Wolffsohn: Alcon, Aston EyeTech, Bausch & Lomb, BetterVi￾sion Ltd, CooperVision, Eaglet Eye, European Union, Eyebag,
EMPharma, EyeDocs, Gelflex, Innovate UK, Johnson & Johnson
Vision Care, Lenstec, Medmont, Rayner, Thea, Optimec, Visioncare 
Research (F); Aston EyeTech (I); British Contact Lens Association,
University of Houston, Visioncare Research, CooperVision (C);
Portable Aberrometer, Contrast Sensitivity Chart (P); Johnson &
Johnson (R)
R. Arita: TearScience (F); Japan Fiocus Corp, Kowa (C); Topcon (P)
R. Chalmers: Johnson & Johnson Vision Care (F); Alcon, AcuFo￾cus; CooperVision (C); Contact Lens & Anterior Eye/Assoc. Editor (S)
A. Djalilian: None.
M. Dogru: Santen (F), Otsuka (F)
K. Dumbleton: Alcon, CooperVision, Johnson & Johnson Vision
Care (C)
P. Gupta: Allergan, Bio-Tissue, Inc., Alcon, AMO, Novabay, Ocular
Science, Shire, TearLab, TearScience (C)
P. Karpecki: Rigel Pharma (F); Akorn, Allergan, Bausch þ Lomb
(F, C); AMO, Alcon, Beaver-Visitech, BioTissue, Blephex, Bruder
Healthcare, Cambria Pharmaceuticals, Eye Brains, Focus Labora￾tories, Glaukos, iCare USA, Johnson & Johnson Vision Care, Katina,
Konan Medical, Oculus, Ocusoft, Paragon Bioteck, Reichert, Rendia,
Science Based Health, Shire Pharmaceuticals, Sun Pharmaceutical,
Tearfilm Innovations, TearLab, TearScience, Topcon, Visiometrics
(C)
S. Lazreg: None.
H. Pult: Johnson & Johnson Vision Care (F)
B.D. Sullivan: TearLab, Lubris (I, E, P, R, S)
A. Tomlinson: None.
L. Tong: Alcon (C, R); Allergan (F, R); Santen (F); W02013/109193
Computer vision based approach for the assessment of the health
and anatomy of eyelids and ocular surface disease using meibog￾raphy (P); Santen (R)
E. Villani: None.
K. C. Yoon: None.
L. Jones: Advanced Vision Research, Alcon, AlgiPharm, Allergan,
CooperVision, Essilor, Johnson & Johnson, Ocular Dynamics, Oculus,
TearScience, Visioneering Technologies (F); Alcon, Johnson &
Johnson Vision Care (C); Alcon, CooperVision, Johnson & Johnson
(R)
J. P. Craig Oculeve, Allergan, Manuka Health NZ, E-Swin, Coop￾erVision, Alcon, Optima Pharmaceuticals, OPSM NZ, Akorn, Tear￾Science, Medmont (F); Carl Zeiss Meditec, Eye Institute Auckland
(C)
F (Financial Support), I (Personal Financial Interest), E
(Employment), C (Consultant), P (Patent), R (Recipient), N (No
Commercial Relationship), S (non-remunerative).
Acknowledgements
Nino Longo (Catania, Italy) and Sabrina Zappia (Rome, Italy) for
creating the illustrations for this report.
References
[1] The definition and classification of dry eye disease: report of the definition
and classification subcommittee of the international dry eye WorkShop. Ocul
Surf 2007;2007(5):75e92.
[2] Methodologies to diagnose and monitor dry eye disease: report of the
diagnostic methodology subcommittee of the international dry eye Work￾Shop. Ocul Surf 2007;2007(5):108e52.
[3] Bilkhu PS, Wolffsohn JS, Tang GW, Naroo SA. Management of dry eye in UK
pharmacies. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2014;37:382e7.
[4] Craig JP, Nichols KK, Nichols JJ, Caffery B, Dua HS, Akpek EK, et al. TFOS DEWS
II Definition and Classification Report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:276e83.
[5] Ruopp MD, Perkins NJ, Whitcomb BW, Schisterman EF. Youden Index and
optimal cut-point estimated from observations affected by a lower limit of
detection. Biom J 2008;50:419e30.
[6] Epitropoulos AT, Matossian C, Berdy GJ, Malhotra RP, Potvin R. Effect of tear
osmolarity on repeatability of keratometry for cataract surgery planning. J
Cataract Refract Surg 2015;41:1672e7.
[7] Jung HH, Ji YS, Oh HJ, Yoon KC. Higher order aberrations of the corneal
surface after laser subepithelial keratomileusis. Korean J Ophthalmol
2014;28:285e91.
[8] Donnenfeld ED, Solomon R, Roberts CW, Wittpenn JR, McDonald MB,
Perry HD. Cyclosporine 0.05% to improve visual outcomes after multifocal
intraocular lens implantation. J Cataract Refract Surg 2010;36:1095e100.
[9] Lohmann CP, Guell JL. Regression after LASIK for the treatment of myopia:
the role of the corneal epithelium. Semin Ophthalmol 1998;13:79e82.
[10] Sullivan BD, Crews LA, Sonmez B, de la Paz MF, Comert E, Charoenrook V,
et al. Clinical utility of objective tests for dry eye disease: variability over
time and implications for clinical trials and disease management. Cornea
2012;31:1000e8.
[11] Sullivan BD, Whitmer D, Nichols KK, Tomlinson A, Foulks GN, Geerling G,
Khanal S, Ramaesh K, Diaper C, McFadyen A. Tear film osmolarity: deter￾mination of a referent for dry eye diagnosis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2010;47:4309e15.
[13] Lemp MA, Bron AJ, Baudouin C, Benitez Del Castillo JM, Geffen D, Tauber J,
et al. Tear osmolarity in the diagnosis and management of dry eye disease.
Am J Ophthalmol 2011;151. 792e8 e1.
[14] Sambursky R, Davitt 3rd WF, Latkany R, Tauber S, Starr C, Friedberg M, et al.
Sensitivity and specificity of a point-of-care matrix metalloproteinase 9
immunoassay for diagnosing inflammation related to dry eye. JAMA Oph￾thalmol 2013;131:24e8.
[15] Jacobi C, Jacobi A, Kruse FE, Cursiefen C. Tear film osmolarity measurements
in dry eye disease using electrical impedance technology. Cornea 2011;30:
1289e92.
[16] Kallarackal GU, Ansari EA, Amos N, Martin JC, Lane C, Camilleri JP.
A comparative study to assess the clinical use of Fluorescein Meniscus Time
(FMT) with Tear Break up Time (TBUT) and Schirmer's tests (ST) in the
diagnosis of dry eyes. Eye (Lond) 2002;16:594e600.
[17] Moore JE, Graham JE, Goodall EA, Dartt DA, Leccisotti A, McGilligan VE, et al.
Concordance between common dry eye diagnostic tests. Br J Ophthalmol
2009;93:66e72.
[18] Begley CG, Chalmers RL, Abetz L, Venkataraman K, Mertzanis P, Caffery BA,
et al. The relationship between habitual patient-reported symptoms and
clinical signs among patients with dry eye of varying severity. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:4753e61.
[19] Nichols KK, Nichols JJ, Mitchell GL. The lack of association between signs and
symptoms in patients with dry eye disease. Cornea 2004;23:762e70.
[20] Mizuno Y, Yamada M, Miyake Y. Dry Eye Survey Group of the National
Hospital Organization of J. Association between clinical diagnostic tests and
health-related quality of life surveys in patients with dry eye syndrome. Jpn J
Ophthalmol 2010;54:259e65.
[21] Fuentes-Paez G, Herreras JM, Cordero Y, Almaraz A, Gonzalez MJ, Calonge M.
Lack of concordance between dry eye syndrome questionnaires and
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 564
diagnostic tests. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol 2011;86:3e7.
[22] Sullivan BD, Crews LA, Messmer EM, Foulks GN, Nichols KK, Baenninger P,
et al. Correlations between commonly used objective signs and symptoms
for the diagnosis of dry eye disease: clinical implications. Acta Ophthalmol
2014;92:161e6.
[23] Schargus M, Ivanova S, Kakkassery V, Dick HB, Joachim S. Correlation of tear
film osmolarity and 2 different MMP-9 tests with common dry eye tests in a
cohort of non-dry eye patients. Cornea 2015;34:739e44.
[24] Miller KL, Walt JG, Mink DR, Satram-Hoang S, Wilson SE, Perry HD, et al.
Minimal clinically important difference for the ocular surface disease index.
Arch Ophthalmol 2010;128:94e101.
[25] Huang JF, Zhang Y, Rittenhouse KD, Pickering EH, McDowell MT. Evaluations
of tear protein markers in dry eye disease: repeatability of measurement and
correlation with disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:4556e64.
[26] Szalai E, Berta A, Szekanecz Z, Szucs G, Modis Jr L. Evaluation of tear os￾molarity in non-Sjogren and Sjogren syndrome dry eye patients with the
TearLab system. Cornea 2012;31:867e71.
[27] Soria J, Duran JA, Etxebarria J, Merayo J, Gonzalez N, Reigada R, et al. Tear
proteome and protein network analyses reveal a novel pentamarker panel
for tear film characterization in dry eye and meibomian gland dysfunction. J
Proteomics 2013;78:94e112.
[28] Cocho L, Fernandez I, Calonge M, Martinez V, Gonzalez-Garcia MJ,
Caballero D, et al. Biomarkers in ocular chronic graft versus host disease: tear
cytokine- and chemokine-based predictive model. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2016;57:746e58.
[29] Enriquez-de-Salamanca A, Castellanos E, Stern ME, Fernandez I, Carreno E,
Garcia-Vazquez C, et al. Tear cytokine and chemokine analysis and clinical
correlations in evaporative-type dry eye disease. Mol Vis 2010;16:862e73.
[32] Fairchild CJ, Chalmers RL, Begley CG. Clinically important difference in dry
eye: change in IDEEL-symptom bother. Optom Vis Sci 2008;85:699e707.
[33] Armstrong RA, Eperjesi F, Gilmartin B. The application of analysis of variance
(ANOVA) to different experimental designs in optometry. Ophthalmic
Physiol Opt 2002;22:248e56.
[34] Armstrong RAH, AC. Statistical Analysis in Microbiology: StatNotes. Wiley￾Blackwell; 2010.
[35] Schiffman RM, Christianson MD, Jacobsen G, Hirsch JD, Reis BL. Reliability
and validity of the ocular surface disease index. Arch Ophthalmol 2000;118:
615e21.
[36] Tian L, Qu JH, Zhang XY, Sun XG. Repeatability and reproducibility of
noninvasive keratograph 5M measurements in patients with dry eye disease.
J Ophthalmol 2016;2016:8013621.
[37] Chalmers RL, Begley CG, Caffery B. Validation of the 5-Item Dry Eye Ques￾tionnaire (DEQ-5): discrimination across self-assessed severity and aqueous
tear deficient dry eye diagnoses. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2010;33:55e60.
[38] Nichols JJ, Nichols KK, Puent B, Saracino M, Mitchell GL. Evaluation of tear
film interference patterns and measures of tear break-up time. Optom Vis Sci
2002;79:363e9.
[39] Nichols KK, Mitchell GL, Zadnik K. The repeatability of clinical measurements
of dry eye. Cornea 2004;23:272e85.
[40] Wei A, Le Q, Hong J, Wang W, Wang F, Xu J. Assessment of lower tear
meniscus. Optom Vis Sci 2016;93:1420e5.
[41] Li J, Shen M, Wang J, Ma H, Tao A, Xu S, et al. Clinical significance of tear
menisci in dry eye. Eye Contact Lens 2012;38:183e7.
[42] Wang J, Palakuru JR, Aquavella JV. Correlations among upper and lower tear
menisci, noninvasive tear break-up time, and the Schirmer test. Am J Oph￾thalmol 2008;145:795e800.
[43] Wu S, Hong J, Tian L, Cui X, Sun X, Xu J. Assessment of bulbar redness with a
newly developed keratograph. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92:892e9.
[44] Efron N. Grading scales for contact lens complications. Ophthalmic Physiol
Opt 1998;18:182e6.
[45] Korb D, Herman J, Blackie C, Scaffidi R, Greiner J, Exford J, et al. Prevalence of
lid wiper epitheliopathy in subjects with dry eye signs and symptoms.
Cornea 2010;29:377e83.
[46] Masmali A, Alqahtani TA, Alharbi A, El-Hiti GA. Comparative study of
repeatability of phenol red thread test versus Schirmer test in normal adults
in Saudi Arabia. Eye Contact Lens 2014;40:127e31.
[47] Gokhale M, Stahl U, Jalbert I. In situ osmometry: validation and effect of
sample collection technique. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90:359e65.
[48] Thue G, Sandberg S. Analytical performance specifications based on how
clinicians use laboratory tests. Experiences from a post-analytical external
quality assessment programme. Clin Chem Lab Med 2015;53:857e62.
[49] Fortes MB, Diment BC, Di Felice U, Gunn AE, Kendall JL, Esmaeelpour M, et al.
Tear fluid osmolarity as a potential marker of hydration status. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 2011;43:1590e7.
[50] Versura P, Bavelloni A, Grillini M, Fresina M, Campos EC. Diagnostic perfor￾mance of a tear protein panel in early dry eye. Mol Vis 2013;19:1247e57.
[51] Zhou L, Beuerman RW, Chan CM, Zhao SZ, Li XR, Yang H. Identification of tear
fluid biomarkers in dry eye syndrome using iTRAQ quantitative proteomics. J
Proteome Res 2009;8:4889e905.
[52] Foulks GN. Challenges and pitfalls in clinical trials of treatments for dry eye.
Ocul Surf 2003;1:20e30.
[53] The definition and classification of dry eye disease: report of the definition
and classification subcommittee of the international dry eye workshop. Ocul
Surf 2007;5:75e92.
[54] Begley C, Chalmers RL, Abetz L, Venkataraman K, Mertzanis P, Caffery BA,
et al. The relationship between habitual patient-reported symptoms and
clinical signs among patients with dry eye of varying severity. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:4753e61.
[55] Nichols KK, Nichols JJ, Zadnik K. Frequency of dry eye diagnostic test proced￾ures used in various modes of ophthalmic practice. Cornea 2000;19:477e82.
[56] Korb DR. Survey of preferred tests for diagnostis of the tear film and dry eye.
Cornea 2000;19:483e6.
[57] Stapleton F, Alves M, Bunya VY, Jalbert I, Lekhanont K, Malet F, et al. TFOS
DEWS II Epidemiology Report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:334e65.
[58] Begley CG, Caffery B, Chalmers RL, Mitchell GL, Dry Eye Investigation Study
G. Use of the dry eye questionnaire to measure symptoms of ocular irritation
in patients with aqueous tear deficient dry eye. Cornea 2002;21:664e70.
[59] Camp A, Wellik SR, Tzu JH, Feuer W, Arheart KL, Sastry A, et al. Dry eye
specific quality of life in veterans using glaucoma drops. Cont Lens Anterior
Eye 2015;38:220e5.
[60] Galor A, Felix ER, Feuer W, Shalabi N, Martin ER, Margolis TP, et al. Dry eye
symptoms align more closely to non-ocular conditions than to tear film
parameters. Br J Ophthalmol 2015;99:1126e9.
[61] Fernandez CA, Galor A, Arheart KL, Musselman DL, Venincasa VD, Florez HJ,
et al. Dry eye syndrome, posttraumatic stress disorder, and depression in an
older male veteran population. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:3666e72.
[62] Sakane Y, Yokoi N, Uchino M, Dogru M, Oishi T, et al. Development and
validation of the dry eye-related quality-of-life score questionnaire. JAMA
Ophthalmol 2013;131:1331e8.
[63] Abetz L, Rajagopalan K, Mertzanis P, Begley C, Barnes R, Chalmers R, et al.
Development and validation of the impact of dry eye on everyday life (IDEEL)
questionnaire, a patient-reported outcomes (PRO) measure for the assess￾ment of the burden of dry eye on patients. Health Qual Life Outcomes
2011;9:111.
[64] McMonnies CW, Ho A. Responses to a dry eye questionnaire from a normal
population. J Am Optom Assoc 1987;58:588e91.
[65] Tang F, Wang J, Tang Z, Kang M, Deng Q, Yu J. Accuracy of McMonnies
questionnaire as a screening tool for Chinese ophthalmic outpatients. PLoS
One 2016;11:e0153047.
[66] Johnson ME, Murphy PJ. Measurement of ocular surface irritation on a linear
interval scale with the ocular comfort index. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2007;48:4451e8.
[67] Chao C, Golebiowski B, Cui Y, Stapleton F. Development of a Chinese version
of the ocular comfort index. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:3562e71.
[68] Golebiowski B, Badarudin N, Eden J, You J, Hampel U, Stapleton F. Does
endogenous serum oestrogen play a role in meibomian gland dysfunction in
postmenopausal women with dry eye? Br J Ophthalmol 2016;101(2):
218e22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bjophthalmol-2016-308473.
[69] Amparo F, Schaumberg DA, Dana R. Comparison of two questionnaires for
dry eye symptom assessment: the ocular surface disease index and the
symptom assessment in dry eye. Ophthalmology 2015;122:1498e503.
[70] Asiedu K, Kyei S, Boampong F, Ocansey S. Symptomatic Dry Eye and Its
Associated Factors: A Study of University Undergraduate Students in Ghana.
Eye Contact Lens. 2016.
[71] Baudouin C, Aragona P, Van Setten G, Rolando M, Irkec M, Benitez del
Castillo J, et al. Diagnosing the severity of dry eye: a clear and practical al￾gorithm. Br J Ophthalmol 2014;98:1168e76.
[72] Finis D, Pischel N, Konig C, JHayajneh, Schrader S, et al. Comparison of the
OSDI and SPEED questionnaires for the evaluation of dry eye disease in
clinical routine. Ophthalmologe 2014;111:1050e6.
[73] Miller KLWJ, Mink DR, Satram-Hoang S, Wilson SE, Perry HD, Asbell PA, et al.
Minimal clinically important difference for the ocular surface disease index.
Arch Ophthalmol 2010;128:94e101.
[74] Ogawa Y, Kim SK, Dana R, Clayton J, Jain S, Rosenblatt MI, et al. International
chronic ocular graft-vs-host-disease (GVHD) consensus group: proposed
diagnostic criteria for chronic GVHD (Part I). Sci Rep 2013;3:3419.
[75] Schaumberg DA, Gulati A, Mathers WD, Clinch T, Lemp MA, Nelson JD, et al.
Development and validation of a short global dry eye symptom index. Ocul
Surf 2007;5:50e7.
[76] Saboo US, Amparo F, Abud TB, Schaumberg DA, Dana R. Vision-related
quality of life in patients with ocular graft-versus-host disease. Ophthal￾mology 2015;122:1669e74.
[77] Blackie CA, Solomon JD, Scaffidi RC, Greiner JV, Lemp MA, Korb DR. The
relationship between dry eye symptoms and lipid layer thickness. Cornea
2009;28:789e94.
[78] Begley CGCR, Mitchell GL, Nichols KK, Caffery B, Simpson T, DuToit R, et al.
Characterization of ocular surface symptoms from optometric practices in
North America. Cornea 2001;20:610e8.
[79] Nichols JJ, Mitchell GL, Nichols KK, Chalmers R, Begley C. The performance of
the contact lens dry eye questionnaire as a screening survey for contact lens￾related dry eye. Cornea 2002;21:469e75.
[80] Chalmers RLBC, Moody K, Hickson-Curran S. Contact lens dry eye Ques￾tionnaire-8 and overall opinion of contact lenses. Optom Vis Sci 2012;89:
1435e42.
[81] Chalmers RLKL, Hickson-Curran SB, Gleason WJ. Cutoff score and respon￾siveness of the 8-item Contact Lens Dry Eye Questionnaire (CLDEQ-8) in a
large daily disposable contact lens registry. Cont Lens Anterior Eye
2016;39(5):342e352. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clae.2016.04.005.
[82] Pesudovs KGE, Elliott DB. The contact lens impact on quality of life (CLIQ)
questionnaire: development and validation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 565
2006;47:2789e96.
[83] Edurmus MYE, Abdalla YF, Hammersmith KM, Rapuano CJ, Cohen EJ. Contact
lens related quality of life in patients with keratoconus. Eye Contact Lens
2009;35:123e7.
[84] Services USDoHaH. Patient-reported outcome measures: use in medical
product development to support labelling claims. Guidance for industry.
Available at: http://www.fda.gov/dowlloads/Drugs/GuidanceCompliance
RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM193282.pdf. Center for Drug Eval￾uaiton and Research; Center for biologics Evaluation and Research; Center
for Devices and Radiological Health
[85] Guillemin IBC, Chalmers R, Baudouin C, Arnould B. Appraisal of Patient-Re￾ported Outcome instruments available for randomized clinical trials in dry
eye: revisiting the standards. Ocul Surf 2012;10:84e99.
[86] Li M, Gong L, Chapin WJ, Zhu M. Assessment of vision-related quality of life
in dry eye patients. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:5722e7.
[87] Bjerrum KB. Test and symptoms in keratoconjunctivitis sicca and their cor￾relation. Acta Ophthalmol Scand 1996;74:436e41.
[88] Vitali C, Moutsopoulos HM, Bombardieri S. The European Community Study
Group on diagnostic criteria for Sjogren's Syndrome. Sensitivity and speci- €
ficity of tests for ocular and oral involvement in Sjogren's syndrome. Ann
Rheum Dis 1994;53:637e47.
[89] Rajagopalan K, Abetz L, Mertzanis P, Espindle D, Begley C, Chalmers R, et al.
Comparing the discriminative validity of two generic and one disease-spe￾cific health-related quality of life measures in a sample of patients with dry
eye. Value Health 2005;8:168e74.
[90] Nichols KK, Mitchell GL, Zadnik K. Performance and repeatability of the NEI￾VFQ-25 in patients with dry eye. Cornea 2002;21:578e83.
[91] Gonzalez-Perez M, Susi R, Antona B, Barrio A, Gonzalez E. The Computer￾Vision Symptom Scale (CVSS17): development and initial validation. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:4504e11.
[92] Nilforoushan MR, Latkany RA, Speaker MG. Effect of artificial tears on visual
acuity. Am J Ophthalmol 2005;140:830e5.
[93] van Landingham SW, West SK, Akpek EK, Munoz B, Ramulu PY. Impact of dry
eye on reading in a population-based sample of the elderly: the Salisbury Eye
Evaluation. Br J Ophthalmol 2014;98:639e44.
[94] Rolando M, Iester M, Macri A, Calabria G. Low spatial-contrast sensitivity in
dry eyes. Cornea 1998;17:376e9.
[95] Huang FC, Tseng SH, Shih MH, Chen FK. Effect of artificial tears on corneal
surface regularity, contrast sensitivity, and glare disability in dry eyes.
Ophthalmology 2002;109:1934e40.
[96] Deschamps N, Ricaud X, Rabut G, Labbe A, Baudouin C, Denoyer A. The
impact of dry eye disease on visual performance while driving. Am J Oph￾thalmol 2013;156:184e9.
[97] Ridder 3rd WH, Tomlinson A, Huang JF, Li J. Impaired visual performance in
patients with dry eye. Ocul Surf 2011;9:42e55.
[98] Goto E, Yagi Y, Matsumoto Y, Tsubota K. Impaired functional visual acuity of
dry eye patients. Am J Ophthalmol 2002;133:181e6.
[99] Ishida R, Kojima T, Dogru M, Kaido M, Matsumoto Y, Tanaka M, et al. The
application of a new continuous functional visual acuity measurement sys￾tem in dry eye syndromes. Am J Ophthalmol 2005;139:253e8.
[100] Kaido M, Dogru M, Yamada M, Sotozono C, Kinoshita S, Shimazaki J, et al.
Functional visual acuity in Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol
2006;142:917e22.
[101] Kaido M, Matsumoto Y, Shigeno Y, Ishida R, Dogru M, Tsubota K. Corneal
fluorescein staining correlates with visual function in dry eye patients. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:9516e22.
[102] Kaido M, Toda I, Ishida R, Konagai M, Dogru M, Tsubota K. Age-related
changes in functional visual acuity in healthy individuals. Jpn J Ophthalmol
2011;55:183e9.
[103] Hara S, Kojima T, Ishida R, Goto E, Matsumoto Y, Kaido M, et al. Evaluation of
tear stability after surgery for conjunctivochalasis. Optom Vis Sci 2011;88:
1112e8.
[104] Kaido M, Matsutani T, Negishi K, Dogru M, Tsubota K. Aged drivers may
experience decreased visual function while driving. Asia Pac J Ophthalmol
(Phila) 2013;2:150e8.
[105] Ibrahim OM, Dogru M, Kaido M, Kojima T, Fujishima H, Tsubota K. Functional
visual acuity assessment of severe atopic keratoconjunctivitis. Cornea
2014;33(Suppl 11):S13e8.
[106] Kaido M, Kawashima M, Yokoi N, Fukui M, Ichihashi Y, Kato H, et al.
Advanced dry eye screening for visual display terminal workers using
functional visual acuity measurement: the Moriguchi study. Br J Ophthalmol
2015;99(11):1488e92.
[107] Tutt R, Bradley A, Begley C, Thibos LN. Optical and visual impact of tear
break-up in human eyes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:4117e23.
[108] Liu H, Thibos L, Begley CG, Bradley A. Measurement of the time course of
optical quality and visual deterioration during tear break-up. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2010;51:3318e26.
[109] Montes-Mico R, Caliz A, Alio JL. Wavefront analysis of higher order aberra￾tions in dry eye patients. J Refract Surg 2004;20:243e7.
[110] Koh S, Maeda N, Hirohara Y, Mihashi T, Bessho K, Hori Y, et al. Serial mea￾surements of higher-order aberrations after blinking in patients with dry
eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:133e8.
[111] Denoyer A, Rabut G, Baudouin C. Tear film aberration dynamics and vision￾related quality of life in patients with dry eye disease. Ophthalmology
2012;119:1811e8.
[112] Habay T, Majzoub S, Perrault O, Rousseau C, Pisella PJ. Objective assessment
of the functional impact of dry eye severity on the quality of vision by
double-pass aberrometry. J Fr Ophtalmol 2014;37:188e94.
[113] Koh S, Maeda N, Ikeda C, Asonuma S, Mitamura H, Oie Y, et al. Ocular forward
light scattering and corneal backward light scattering in patients with dry
eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:6601e6.
[114] Sweeney DFM, T J, Raju SR. Tear film stability: a review. Exp eye Res
2013;117:28e38.
[115] Lemp MA, Holly FJ, Iwata S, Dohlman CH. The precorneal tear film. I. Factors
in spreading and maintaining a continuous tear film over the corneal surface.
Arch Ophthalmol 1970;83:89e94.
[116] Norn M. Desiccation of the precorneal tear film I. Corneal wetting time. Acta
Ophthalmol 1969;47:865e80.
[117] Mengher LSB, A J, Tonge SR, Gilbert DJ. Effect of fluorescein instillation on the
pre-corneal tear film stability. Curr Eye Res 1985;4:9e12.
[118] Mooi JK, Wang MT, Lim J, Muller A, Craig JP. Minimising instilled volume
reduces the impact of fluorescein on clinical measurements of tear film
stability. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2017.
[119] Pult H, Riede-Pult BH. A new modified fluorescein strip: its repeatability and
usefulness in tear film break-up time analysis. Cont Lens Anterior Eye
2012;35:35e8.
[120] Kim KT, Kim JH, Kong YT, Chae JB, Hyung S. Reliability of a new modified tear
breakup time method: dry tear breakup time. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Oph￾thalmol 2015;253:1355e61.
[121] Korb DR, Greiner JV, Herman J. Comparison of fluorescein break-up time
measurement reproducibility using standard fluorescein strips versus the
Dry Eye Test (DET) method. Cornea 2001;20:811e5.
[122] Lemp MA, Hamill JR. Factors affecting tear film breakup in normal eyes. Arch
Ophthalmol 1973;89:103e5.
[123] Abelson MBO, G 3rd W, Nally LA, Welch D, Krenzer K. Alternative reference
values for tear film break up time in normal and dry eye populations. Adv
Exp Med Biol 2002;506:1121e5.
[124] Abelson RL, K J, Rodriguez J, Johnston P, Angjeli E, Ousler G, et al. A single￾center study evaluating the effect of the controlled adverse environment
(CAE(SM)) model on tear film stability. Clin Ophthalmol 2012;6:1865e72.
[125] Sullivan BD, Crews LA, Sonmez B, Paz MF, Comert E, Charoenrook V. Clinical
utility of objective tests for dry eye disease: variability over time and im￾plications for clinical trials and disease management. Cornea 2012:31.
[126] Cebreiro E, Ramos L, Mosquera A, Barreira N, Penedo MFG. Automation of the
tear film break-up time test. In: 4th international symposium on applied
sciences in biomedical and communication technologies. Barcelona: ISA￾BEL'11; 2011.
[127] Ramos L, Barreira N, Mosquera A, Penedo MG, Yebra-Pimentel E, García￾Resúa C. Analysis of parameters for the automatic computation of the tear
film break-up time test based on CCLRU standards. Comput Methods Pro￾grams Biomed 2014;113:715e24.
[128] Cardona G, Seres C, Quevedo L, Auge M. Knowledge and use of tear film
evaluation tests by Spanish practitioners. Optom Vis Sci 2011;88:1106e11.
[129] Downie LE, Keller PR, Vingrys AJ. An evidence-based analysis of Australian
optometrists' dry eye practices. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90:1385e95.
[130] Turner AW, Layton CJ, Bron AJ. Survey of eye practitioners' attitudes towards
diagnostic tests and therapies for dry eye disease. Clin Exp Ophthalmol
2005;33:351e5.
[131] Graham JE, McGilligan VE, Berrar D, Leccisotti A, Moore JE, Bron AJ, et al.
Attitudes towards diagnostic tests and therapies for dry eye disease.
Ophthalmic Res 2010;43:11e7.
[132] Smith J, Nichols KK, Baldwin EK. Current patterns in the use of diagnostic
tests in dry eye evaluation. Cornea 2008;27:656e62.
[133] Wang MT, Murphy PJ, Blades KJ, Craig JP. Comparison of non-invasive tear
film stability measurement techniques. Clin Exp Optom 2017 (in press).
[134] Mengher LS, Bron AJ, Tonge SR, Gilbert DJ. A non-invasive instrument for
clinical assessment of the pre-corneal tear film stability. Curr Eye Res
1985;4:1e7.
[135] Hirji N, Patel S, Callander M. Human tear film pre-rupture phase time (TP￾RPT) - a non-invasive technique for evaluating the pre-corneal tear film
using a novel keratometer mire. Ophthal Physiol Opt 1989;9:139e42.
[136] Liu Z, Pflugfelder SC. Corneal surface regularity and the effect of artificial
tears in aqueous tear deficiency. Ophthalmology 1999;106:939e43.
[137] Goto T, Zheng X, Okamoto S, Ohashi Y. Tear film stability analysis system:
introducing a new application for videokeratography. Cornea 2004;23:
S65e70.
[138] Goto T, Zheng X, Klyce SD, Kataoka H, Uno T, Karon M, et al. A new method
for tear film stability analysis using videokeratography. Am J Ophthalmol
2003;135:607e12.
[139] Kojima T, Ishida R, Dogru M, Goto E, Takano Y, Matsumoto Y. A new
noninvasive tear stability analysis system for the assessment of dry eyes.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004:45.
[140] Gumus K, Crockett CH, Rao K, Yeu E, Weikert MP, Shirayama M, et al.
Noninvasive assessment of tear stability with the tear stability analysis
system in tear dysfunction patients. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:
456e61.
[141] Best NDL, Wolffsohn JS. Clinical evaluation of the Oculus keratograph. Cont
Lens Anterior Eye 2012;35:171e4.
[142] Hong J, Sun X, Wei A, Cui X, Li Y, Qian T, et al. Assessment of tear film sta￾bility in dry eye with a newly developed keratograph. Cornea 2013;32:
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 566
716e21.
[143] Abdelfattah NS, Dastiridou A, Sadda SR, Lee OL. Noninvasive imaging of tear
film dynamics in eyes with ocular surface disease. Cornea 2015;34(Suppl
10):S48e52.
[144] Alonso-Caneiro D, Iskander DR, Collins MJ. Tear film surface quality with soft
contact lenses using dynamic-area high-speed videokeratoscopy. Eye Con￾tact Lens 2009;35:227e31.
[145] Iskander DR, Collins MJ. Applications of high-speed videokeratoscopy. Clin
Exp Optom 2005;88:223e31.
[146] Kopf M, Yi F, Iskander DR, Collins MJ, Shaw AJ, Straker B. Tear film surface
quality with soft contact lenses using dynamic videokeratoscopy. J Optom
2008;1:14e21.
[147] Downie LE. Automated tear film surface quality breakup time as a novel
clinical marker for tear hyperosmolarity in dry eye disease. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:7260e8.
[148] Craig JP, Tomlinson A. Importance of the lipid layer in human tear film
stability and evaporation. Optom Vis Sci 1997;74:8e13.
[149] Doane MG. An instrument for in vivo tear film interferometry. Optom Vis Sci
1989;66:383e8.
[150] Guillon JP. Use of the Tearscope Plus and attachments in the routine ex￾amination of the marginal dry eye contact lens patient. Adv Exp Med Biol
1998;438:859e67.
[151] Maissa C, Guillon M. Tear film dynamics and lipid layer characteristicseeffect
of age and gender. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2010;33:176e82.
[152] Yokoi N, Komuro A. Non-invasive methods of assessing the tear film. Exp Eye
Res 2004;78:399e407.
[153] Finis D, Pischel N, Schrader S, Geerling G. Evaluation of lipid layer thickness
measurement of the tear film as a diagnostic tool for Meibomian gland
dysfunction. Cornea 2013;32:1549e53.
[154] Guillon M, Styles E, Guillon JP, Maissa C. Preocular tear film characteristics of
nonwearers and soft contact lens wearers. Optom Vis Sci 1997;74:273e9.
[155] Cho P, Douthwaite W. The relation between invasive and noninvasive tear
break-up time. Optom Vis Sci 1995;72:17e22.
[156] Craig JP, Singh I, Tomlinson A, Morgan PB. The role of tear physiology in
ocular surface temperature. Eye (Lond) 2000;14(Pt 4):635e41.
[157] Tan JH, Ng EYK, Rajendra Acharya U, Chee C. Infrared thermography on
ocular surface temperature: a review. Infrared Phys Technol 2009;52:
97e108.
[158] Purslow C, Wolffsohn J. The relation between physical properties of the
anterior eye and ocular surface temperature. Optom Vis Sci 2007;84:
197e201.
[159] Fujishima H, Toda I, Yamada M, Sato N, Tsubota K. Corneal temperature in
patients with dry eye evaluated by infrared radiation thermometry. Br J
Ophthalmol 1996;80:29e32.
[160] Kamao T, Yamaguchi M, Kawasaki S, Mizoue S, Shiraishi A, Ohashi Y.
Screening for dry eye with newly developed ocular surface thermographer.
Am J Ophthalmol 2011;151:782e91.
[161] Su TY, Hwa CK, Liu PH, Wu MH, Chang DO, Su PF, et al. Noncontact detection
of dry eye using a custom designed infrared thermal image system. J Biomed
Opt 2011;16:046009.
[162] Klamann MKJ, Maier AKB, Gonnermann J, Klein JP, Pleyer U. Measurement of
dynamic ocular surface temperature in healthy subjects using a new ther￾mography device. Curr Eye Res 2012;37:678e83.
[163] Szczesna DH, Alonso-Caneiro D, Iskander DR, Read SA, Collins MJ. Predicting
dry eye using noninvasive techniques of tear film surface assessment. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:751e6.
[164] Abreau K, Callan C, Kottaiyan R, Zhang A, Yoon G, Aquavella JV, et al. Tem￾peratures of the ocular surface, lid, and periorbital regions of Sjogren's,
evaporative, and aqueous-deficient dry eyes relative to normals. Ocul Surf
2016;14:64e73.
[165] Li W, Graham AD, Selvin S, Lin MC. Ocular surface cooling corresponds to
tear film thinning and breakup. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92. e248ee56.
[166] Su TY, Chang SW, Yang CJ, Chiang HK, Ho WT, Chang SW, Chiang HK.
Thermographic evaluation of tear film break-up time to study tear film
stability. Int J Therm Sci 2014;99:36e40.
[168] Versura P, Giannaccare G, Fresina M, Campos EC. Subjective discomfort
symptoms are related to low corneal temperature in patients with evapo￾rative dry eye. Cornea 2015;34:1079e85.
[169] Gilbard JP, Farris RL, Santamaria II J. Osmolarity of tear microvolumes in
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Arch Ophthalmol 1978;96:677e81.
[170] Keech A, Senchyna M, Jones L. Impact of time between collection and
collection method on human tear fluid osmolarity. Curr Eye Res 2013;38:
428e36.
[171] Sullivan B. Challenges in using signs and symptoms to evaluate new bio￾markers of dry eye disease. Ocul Surf 2014;12:2e9.
[172] Liu H, Begley C, Chen M, Bradley A, Bonanno J, McNamara NA, et al. A link
between tear instability and hyperosmolarity in dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2009;50:3671e9.
[173] Peng CC, Cerretani C, Braun RJ, Radke CJ. Evaporation-driven instability of the
precorneal tear film. Adv Colloid Interface Sci 2014;206:250e64.
[174] Willcox MDP, Argüeso P, Georgiev GA, Holopainen JM, Laurie GW, Millar TJ,
et al. TFOS DEWS II Tear Film Report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:366e403.
[175] Abusharha AA, Pearce EI. The effect of low humidity on the human tear film.
Cornea 2013;32:429e34.
[176] Hamano H, Hori M, Mitsunaga S. Measurement of evaporation rate of water
from the precorneal tear film and contact lenses. Contacto 1981;25:7e14.
[177] Trees GR, Tomlinson A. Effect of artificial tear solutions and saline on tear
film evaporation. Optom Vis Sci 1990;67:886e90.
[178] Rolando M, Refojo MF. Tear evaporimeter for measuring water evaporation
rate from the tear film under controlled conditions in humans. Exp Eye Res
1983;36:25e33.
[179] Rolando M, Refojo MF, Kenyon KR. Increased tear evaporation in eyes with
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Arch Ophthalmol 1983;101:557e8.
[180] Tsubota K, Yamada M. Tear evaporation from the ocular surface. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1992;33:2942e50.
[181] Tomlinson A, Cedarstaff TH. Tear evaporation from the human eye: the ef￾fects of contact lens wear. J Br Contact Lens Assoc 1982;5:141e4. 6-7.
[182] Mathers WD, Binarao G, Petroll M. Ocular water evaporation and the dry eye.
A new measuring device. Cornea 1993;12:335e40.
[183] Mathers WD, Daley TE. Tear flow and evaporation in patients with and
without dry eye. Ophthalmology 1996;103:664e9.
[184] Guillon M, Maissa C. Contact lens wear affects tear film evaporation. Eye
Contact Lens 2008;34:326e30.
[185] Craig JP, Willcox MD, Argueso P, Maissa C, Stahl U, Tomlinson A, et al. The
TFOS International Workshop on Contact Lens Discomfort: report of the
contact lens interactions with the tear film subcommittee. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2013;54. TFOS123e56.
[186] Abusharha AA, Pearce EI, Fagehi R. Effect of ambient temperature on the
human tear film. Eye Contact Lens 2015.
[187] Uchiyama E, Aronowicz JD, Butovich IA, McCulley JP. Increased evaporative
rates in laboratory testing conditions simulating airplane cabin relative hu￾midity: an important factor for dry eye syndrome. Eye Contact Lens 2007;33:
174e6.
[188] Wojtowicz JC, McCulley JP. Assessment and impact of the time of day on
aqueous tear evaporation in normal subjects. Eye Contact Lens 2009;35:
117e9.
[189] Petznick A, Tan JH, Boo SK, Lee SY, Acharya UR, Tong L. Repeatability of a new
method for measuring tear evaporation rates. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90:
366e71.
[190] Rohit A, Ehrmann K, Naduvilath T, Willcox M, Stapleton F. Validating a new
device for measuring tear evaporation rates. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt
2014;34:53e62.
[191] Tan JH, Ng EYK, Acharya UR. Evaluation of tear evaporation from ocular
surface by functional infrared thermography. Med Phys 2010;37:6022e34.
[192] Purslow C, Wolffsohn JS, Santodomingo-Rubido J. The effect of contact lens
wear on dynamic ocular surface temperature. Cont Lens Anterior Eye
2005;28:29e36.
[193] Bron AJ, Abelson MB, Ousler G, Pearce E, Tomlinson A, Yokoi N, et al.
Methodologies to diagnose and monitor dry eye disease: report of the
diagnostic methodology subcommittee of the international Dry Eye Work￾shop. Ocul Surf 2007;2007(5):108e52.
[194] Best N, Drury L, Wolffsohn JS. Predicting success with silicone-hydrogel
contact lenses in new wearers. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2013;36:232e7.
[195] Elliott M, Fandrich H, Simpson T, Fonn D. Analysis of the repeatability of tear
break-up time measurement techniques on asymptomatic subjects before,
during and after contact lens wear. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 1998;21:98e103.
[196] Wang J, Aquavella J, Palakuru J, Chung S, Feng C. Relationships between
central tear film thickness and tear menisci of the upper and lower eyelids.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:4349e55.
[197] Holly FJ. Physical chemistry of the normal and disordered tear film. Trans
Ophthalmol Soc U K 1985;104(Pt 4):374e80.
[198] Mainstone JC, Bruce AS, Golding TR. Tear meniscus measurement in the
diagnosis of dry eye. Curr Eye Res 1996;15:653e61.
[199] Golding TR, Bruce AS, Mainstone JC. Relationship between tear-meniscus
parameters and tear-film breakup. Cornea 1997;16:649e61.
[200] Oguz H, Yokoi N, Kinoshita S. The height and radius of the tear meniscus and
methods for examining these parameters. Cornea 2000;19:497e500.
[201] Yokoi N, Bron A, Tiffany J, Brown N, Hsuan J, Fowler C. Reflective menisc￾ometry: a non-invasive method to measure tear meniscus curvature. Br J
Ophthalmol 1999;83:92e7.
[202] Yokoi N, Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Kinoshita S. Reflective meniscometry: a new
field of dry eye assessment. Cornea 2000;19:S37e43.
[203] Bandlitz S, Purslow C, Murphy PJ, Pult H. The relationship between tear
meniscus regularity and conjunctival folds. Optom Vis Sci 2014;91:1037e44.
[204] Bandlitz S, Purslow C, Murphy PJ, Pult H, Bron AJ. A new portable digital
meniscometer. Optom Vis Sci 2014;91:e1e8.
[205] Bandlitz S, Purslow C, Murphy PJ, Pult H. Comparison of a new portable
digital meniscometer and optical coherence tomography in tear meniscus
radius measurement. Acta Ophthalmol 2014;92. e112e8.
[206] Bandlitz S, Purslow C, Murphy PJ, Pult H. Time course of changes in tear
meniscus radius and blink rate after instillation of artificial tears. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2014;55:5842e7.
[207] Akiyama R, Usui T, Yamagami S. Diagnosis of dry eye by tear meniscus
measurements using anterior segment swept source optical coherence to￾mography. Cornea 2015;34(Suppl 11):S115e20.
[208] Altan-Yaycioglu R, Sizmaz S, Canan H, Coban-Karatas M. Optical coherence
tomography for measuring the tear film meniscus: correlation with schirmer
test and tear-film breakup time. Curr Eye Res 2013;38:736e42.
[209] Arriola-Villalobos P, Fernandez-Vigo JI, Diaz-Valle D, Peraza-Nieves JE, Fer￾nandez-Perez C, Benitez-Del-Castillo JM. Assessment of lower tear meniscus
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 567
measurements obtained with Keratograph and agreement with Fourier￾domain optical-coherence tomography. Br J Ophthalmol 2015;99:1120e5.
[210] Baek J, Doh SH, Chung SK. Comparison of tear meniscus height measure￾ments obtained with the keratograph and fourier domain optical coherence
tomography in dry eye. Cornea 2015;34:1209e13.
[211] Bartuzel MM, Szczesna-Iskander DH, Iskander DR. Automatic dynamic tear
meniscus measurement in optical coherence tomography. Biomed Opt Ex￾press 2014;5:2759e68.
[212] Canan H, Altan-Yaycioglu R, Ulas B, Sizmaz S, Coban-Karatas M. Interexa￾miner reproducibility of optical coherence tomography for measuring the
tear film meniscus. Curr Eye Res 2014;39:1145e50.
[213] Chan HH, Zhao Y, Tun TA, Tong L. Repeatability of tear meniscus evaluation
using spectral-domain Cirrus(R) HD-OCT and time-domain Visante(R) OCT.
Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2015;38:368e72.
[214] Chen Q, Zhang X, Cui L, Huang Q, Chen W, Ma H, et al. Upper and lower tear
menisci in Sjogren's syndrome dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:
9373e8.
[215] Cui L, Shen M, Wang J, Jiang J, Li M, Chen D, et al. Age-related changes in tear
menisci imaged by optical coherence tomography. Optom Vis Sci 2011;88:
1214e9.
[216] Czajkowski G, Kaluzny BJ, Laudencka A, Malukiewicz G, Kaluzny JJ. Tear
meniscus measurement by spectral optical coherence tomography. Optom
Vis Sci 2012;89:336e42.
[217] Huang ZP, Meng H. Application of tear meniscus measurement by anterior
segment optical coherence tomography in the diagnosis of dry eye. Eye Sci
2012;27:217e9.
[218] Ibrahim OM, Dogru M, Takano Y, Satake Y, Wakamatsu TH, Fukagawa K, et al.
Application of visante optical coherence tomography tear meniscus height
measurement in the diagnosis of dry eye disease. Ophthalmology 2010;117:
1923e9.
[219] Qiu X, Gong L, Lu Y, Jin H, Robitaille M. The diagnostic significance of Fourier￾domain optical coherence tomography in Sjogren syndrome, aqueous tear
deficiency and lipid tear deficiency patients. Acta Ophthalmol 2012;90.
e359e66.
[220] Qiu X, Gong L, Sun X, Jin H. Age-related variations of human tear meniscus
and diagnosis of dry eye with Fourier-domain anterior segment optical
coherence tomography. Cornea 2011;30543e9.
[221] Shen M, Li J, Wang J, Ma H, Cai C, Tao A, et al. Upper and lower tear menisci in
the diagnosis of dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;50:2722e6.
[222] Shen M, Wang J, Tao A, Chen Q, Lin S, Qu J, et al. Diurnal variation of upper
and lower tear menisci. Am J Ophthalmol 2008;145:801e6.
[223] Su TY, Ho WT, Lu CY, Chang SW, Chiang HK. Correlations among ocular
surface temperature difference value, the tear meniscus height, Schirmer's
test and fluorescein tear film break up time. Br J Ophthalmol 2015;99:482e7.
[224] Tittler EH, Bujak MC, Nguyen P, Zhang X, Li Y, Yiu SC, et al. Between-grader
repeatability of tear meniscus measurements using Fourier-domain OCT in
patients with dry eye. Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging 2011;42:423e7.
[225] Wang CX, Liu YZ, Yuan J, Li BB, Zhou SY. Application of anterior segment
optical coherence tomography for measuring the tear meniscus height in the
diagnosis of dry eye diseases. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi 2009;45:616e20.
[226] Zhou S, Li Y, Lu AT, Liu P, Tang M, Yiu SC, et al. Reproducibility of tear
meniscus measurement by Fourier-domain optical coherence tomography: a
pilot study. Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging 2009;40:442e7.
[227] Pult H, Riede-Pult BH. Impact of conjunctival folds on central tear meniscus
height. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:1459e66.
[228] de Monchy I, Gendron G, Miceli C, Pogorzalek N, Mariette X, Labetoulle M.
Combination of the Schirmer I and phenol red thread tests as a rescue
strategy for diagnosis of ocular dryness associated with Sjogren's syndrome.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:5167e73.
[229] Cho P. The cotton thread test: a brief review and a clinical study of its reli￾ability on Hong Kong-Chinese. Optom Vis Sci 1993;70:804e8.
[230] Tomlinson A, Blades KJ, Pearce EI. What does the phenol red thread test
actually measure? Optom Vis Sci 2001;78:142e6.
[231] Miller WL, Doughty MJ, Narayanan S, Leach NE, Tran A, Gaume AL, et al.
A comparison of tear volume (by tear meniscus height and phenol red thread
test) and tear fluid osmolality measures in non-lens wearers and in contact
lens wearers. Eye Contact Lens 2004;30:132e7.
[232] Sakamoto R, Bennett ES, Henry VA, Paragina S, Narumi T, Izumi Y, et al. The
phenol red thread tear test: a cross-cultural study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
1993;34:3510e4.
[233] Vashisht S, Singh S. Evaluation of Phenol Red Thread test versus Schirmer
test in dry eyes: a comparative study. Int J Appl Basic Med Res 2011;1:40e2.
[234] Patel S, Farrell J, Blades KJ, Grierson DJ. The value of a phenol red impreg￾nated thread for differentiating between the aqueous and non-aqueous
deficient dry eye. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 1998;18:471e6.
[235] Pult H, Purslow C, Murphy PJ. The relationship between clinical signs and dry
eye symptoms. Eye (Lond) 2011;25:502e10.
[236] Doughty MJ, Whyte J, Li W. The phenol red thread test for lacrimal vol￾umeedoes it matter if the eyes are open or closed? Ophthalmic Physiol Opt
2007;27:482e9.
[237] Li N, Deng XG, He MF. Comparison of the Schirmer I test with and without
topical anesthesia for diagnosing dry eye. Int J Ophthalmol 2012;5:478e81.
[238] Tsubota K, Kaido M, Yagi Y, Fujihara T, Shimmura S. Diseases associated with
ocular surface abnormalities: the importance of reflex tearing. Br J Oph￾thalmol 1999;83:89e91.
[239] Serin D, Karsloglu S, Kyan A, Alagoz G. A simple approach to the repeatability
of the Schirmer test without anesthesia: eyes open or closed? Cornea
2007;26:903e6.
[240] Bitton E, Wittich W. Influence of eye position on the Schirmer tear test. Cont
Lens Anterior Eye 2014;37:257e61.
[241] Karampatakis V, Karamitsos A, Skriapa A, Pastiadis G. Comparison between
normal values of 2- and 5-minute Schirmer test without anesthesia. Cornea
2010;29:497e501.
[242] van Bijsterveld OP. Diagnostic tests in the Sicca syndrome. Arch Ophthalmol
1969;82:10e4.
[243] Dogru M, Ishida K, Matsumoto Y, Goto E, Ishioka M, Kojima T, et al. Strip
meniscometry: a new and simple method of tear meniscus evaluation. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:1895e901.
[244] Ibrahim OM, Dogru M, Ward SK, Matsumoto Y, Wakamatsu TH, Ishida K,
et al. The efficacy, sensitivity, and specificity of strip meniscometry in
conjunction with tear function tests in the assessment of tear meniscus.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:2194e8.
[245] Vitali C, Bombardieri S, Jonsson R, Moutsopoulos HM, Alexander EL,
Carsons SE, et al. Classification criteria for Sjogren's syndrome: a revised
version of the European criteria proposed by the American-European
Consensus Group. Ann Rheum Dis 2002;61:554e8.
[246] Potvin R, Makari S, Rapuano CJ. Tear film osmolarity and dry eye disease: a
review of the literature. Clin Ophthalmol 2015;9:2039e47.
[247] Jackson DC, Zeng W, Wong CY, Mifsud EJ, Williamson NA, Ang CS, et al. Tear
interferon-gamma as a biomarker for evaporative dry eye disease. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2016;57:4824e30.
[248] Bunya VY, Fuerst NM, Pistilli M, McCabe BE, Salvo R, Macchi I, et al. Vari￾ability of tear osmolarity in patients with dry eye. JAMA Ophthalmol
2015;133:662e7.
[249] Versura P, Profazio V, Campos EC. Performance of tear osmolarity compared
to previous diagnostic tests for dry eye diseases. Curr Eye Res 2010;35:
553e64.
[250] Schargus M, Meyer-ter-Vehn T, Menrath J, Grigoleit GU, Geerling G. Corre￾lation between tear film osmolarity and the disease score of the interna￾tional chronic ocular graft-versus-host-disease consensus group in
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation patients. Cornea 2015;34:911e6.
[251] Khanal S, Tomlinson A, McFadyen A, CDiaper. Dry eye diagnosis. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:1407e14.
[252] Tomlinson A, McCann LC, Pearce EI. Comparison of human tear film osmo￾larity measured by electrical impedance and freezing point depression
techniques. Cornea 2010;29:1036e41.
[253] Masmali AM, Purslow C, Murphy PJ. The tear ferning test: a simple clinical
technique to evaluate the ocular tear film. Clin Exp Optom 2014;97:
399e406.
[254] Masmali AM, Al-Qhtani S, Al-Gasham TM, El-Hiti GA, Purslow C, Murphy PJ.
Application of a new grading scale for tear ferning in non-dry eye and dry
eye subjects. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2015;38:39e43.
[255] Rolando M, Baldi F, Zingirian M. The effect of hyperosmolarity on tear mucus
ferning. Fortschr Ophthalmol 1986;83:644e6.
[256] Vaikoussis E, Georgiou P, Nomicarios D. Tear mucus ferning in patients with
Sjogren's syndrome. Documenta Ophthalmol Adv Ophthalmol 1994;87:
145e51.
[257] Norn M. Quantitative tear ferning. Clinical investigations. Acta Ophthalmol
(Copenh) 1994;72:369e72.
[258] Maragou M, Vaikousis E, Ntre A, Koronis N, Georgiou P, Hatzidimitriou E,
et al. Tear and saliva ferning tests in Sjogren's syndrome (SS). Clin Rheumatol
1996;15:125e32.
[259] Albach KA, Lauer M, Stolze HH. Diagnosis of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in
rheumatoid arthritis. The value of various tests. Ophthalmologe 1994;91:
229e34.
[260] Puderbach S, Stolze HH. Tear ferning and other lacrimal tests in normal
persons of different ages. Int Ophthalmol 1991;15:391e5.
[261] Ravazzoni L, Ghini C, Macri A, Rolando M. Forecasting of hydrophilic contact
lens tolerance by means of tear ferning test. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Oph￾thalmol 1998;236:354e8.
[262] Evans KS, North RV, Purslow C. Tear ferning in contact lens wearers.
Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 2009;29:199e204.
[263] Downie LE, Keller PR. A pragmatic approach to dry eye diagnosis: evidence
into practice. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92:1189e97.
[264] Niimi J, Tan B, Chang J, Zhou Y, Ghanekar A, Wong M, et al. Diurnal pattern of
tear osmolarity and its relationship to corneal thickness and deswelling.
Cornea 2013;32:1305e10.
[265] Bron AJ, Tomlinson A, Foulks GN, Pepose JS, Baudouin C, Geerling G, et al.
Rethinking dry eye disease: a perspective on clinical implications. Ocul Surf
2014;12:S1e31.
[266] Bron AJ, Argueso P, Irkec M, Bright FV. Clinical staining of the ocular surface:
mechanisms and interpretations. Prog Retin eye Res 2015;44:36e61.
[267] Feenstra RP, Tseng SC. Comparison of fluorescein and rose bengal staining.
Ophthalmology 1992;99:605e17.
[268] Glasgow BJ. Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy reveals quenching of
fluorescein within corneal epithelium. Exp Eye Res 2016;147:12e9.
[269] Khan-Lim D, Berry M. Still confused about rose bengal? Curr Eye Res
2004;29:311e7.
[270] Argueso P, Tisdale A, Spur-Michaud S, Sumiyoshi M, Gipson IK. Mucin
characteristics of human corneal-limbal epithelial cells that exclude the rose
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 568
bengal anionic dye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:113e9.
[271] Manning FJ, Wehrly SR, Foulks GN. Patient tolerance and ocular surface
staining characteristics of lissamine green versus rose bengal. Ophthal￾mology 1995;102:1953e7.
[272] Korb DR, Herman JP, Finnemore VM, Exford JM, Blackie CA. An evaluation of
the efficacy of fluorescein, rose bengal, lissamine green, and a new dye
mixture for ocular surface staining. Eye Contact Lens 2008;34:61e4.
[273] Kim J, Foulks GN. Evaluation of the effect of lissamine green and rose bengal
on human corneal epithelial cells. Cornea 1999;18:328e32.
[274] Chodosh J, Dix RD, Howell RC, Stroop WG, Tseng SC. Staining characteristics
and antiviral activity of sulforhodamine B and lissamine green B. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1994;35:1046e58.
[275] Versura P, Frigato M, Cellini M, Mule R, Malavolta N, Campos EC. Diagnostic
performance of tear function tests in Sjogren's syndrome patients. Eye
(Lond) 2007;21:229e37.
[276] Toda I, Tsubota K. Practical double vital staining for ocular surface evaluation.
Cornea 1993;12:366e7.
[277] Yoon KC, Im SK, Kim HG, You IC. Usefulness of double vital staining with 1%
fluorescein and 1% lissamine green in patients with dry eye syndrome.
Cornea 2011;30:972e6.
[278] Korb DR, Herman JP, Solomon JD, Greiner JV, Blackie CA. Lid wiper staining
and sequential fluorescein instillation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47.
ARVO E-Abstract: 242.
[279] Peterson RC, Wolffsohn JS, Fowler CW. Optimization of anterior eye fluo￾rescein viewing. Am J Ophthalmol 2006;142:572e5.
[280] Hamrah P, Alipour F, Jiang S, Sohn JH, Foulks GN. Optimizing evaluation of
Lissamine Green parameters for ocular surface staining. Eye (Lond) 2011;25:
1429e34.
[281] Lemp MA. Report of the National eye institute/industry workshop on clinical
trials in dry eyes. CLAO J 1995;21:221e32.
[282] Barr JT, Schechtman KB, Fink BA, Pierce GE, Pensyl CD, Zadnik K, et al.
Corneal scarring in the collaborative longitudinal evaluation of keratoconus
(CLEK) study: baseline prevalence and repeatability of detection. Cornea
1999;18:34e46.
[283] Bron AJ, Evans VE, Smith JA. Grading of corneal and conjunctival staining in
the context of other dry eye tests. Cornea 2003;22:640e50.
[284] Miyata K, Amano S, Sawa M, Nishida T. A novel grading method for super-
ficial punctate keratopathy magnitude and its correlation with corneal
epithelial permeability. Arch Ophthalmol 2003;121:1537e9.
[285] Whitcher JP, Shiboski CH, Shiboski SC, Heidenreich AM, Kitagawa K, Zhang S,
et al. A simplified quantitative method for assessing keratoconjunctivitis
sicca from the Sjogren's Syndrome International Registry. Am J Ophthalmol
2010;149:405e15.
[286] Rose-Nussbaumer J, Lietman TM, Shiboski CH, Shiboski SC, Bunya VY,
Akpek EK, et al. Inter-grader agreement of the ocular staining score in the
Sjogren's international clinical collaborative alliance (SICCA) registry. Am J
Ophthalmol 2015;160:1150e3.
[287] Tole DM, McKelvie PA, Daniell M. Reliability of impression cytology for the
diagnosis of ocular surface squamous neoplasia employing the Biopore
membrane. Br J Ophthalmol 2001;85:154e8.
[288] Mrugacz M, Kasacka I, Bakunowicz-Lazarczyk A, Kaczmarski M, Kulak W.
Impression cytology of the conjunctival epithelial cells in patients with cystic
fibrosis. Eye (Lond) 2008;22:1137e40.
[289] Brignole F, Pisella PJ, De Saint Jean M, Goldschild M, Goguel A, Baudouin C.
Flow cytometric analysis of inflammatory markers in KCS: 6-month treat￾ment with topical cyclosporin A. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:90e5.
[290] Yoon KC, Heo H, Im SK, You IC, Kim YH, Park YG. Comparison of autologous
serum and umbilical cord serum eye drops for dry eye syndrome. Am J
Ophthalmol 2007;144:86e92.
[291] Nelson JD, Havener VR, Cameron JD. Cellulose acetate impressions of the
ocular surface. Dry eye states. Arch Ophthalmol 1983;101:1869e72.
[292] Tseng SC. Staging of conjunctival squamous metaplasia by impression
cytology. Ophthalmology 1985;92:728e33.
[293] Blades K, Doughty MJ, Patel S. Pilot study on the use of impression cytology
specimens for quantitative assessment of the surface area of bulbar
conjunctival cells. Optom Vis Sci 1998;75:591e9.
[294] Zuazo F, Lopez-Ponce D, Salinas-Toro D, Valenzuela F, Sans-Puroja J, Srur M,
et al. Conjunctival impression cytology in patients with normal and impaired
OSDI scores. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol 2014;89:391e6.
[295] Pult H, Tosatti SGP, Spencer ND, Asfour J-M, Ebenhoch M, Murphy PJ.
Spontaneous blinking from a tribological viewpoint. Ocul Surf 2015;13:
236e49.
[296] Gumus K, Pflugfelder SC. Increasing prevalence and severity of con￾junctivochalasis with aging detected by anterior segment optical coherence
tomography. Am J Ophthalmol 2013;155. 238e42.e2.
[297] Hoh H, Schirra F, Kienecker C, Ruprecht KW. Lid-parallel conjunctival folds €
(LIPCOF): a definite diagnostic sign of dry eye. Ophthalmologe 1995;92:
802e8.
[298] Berry M, Pult H, Purslow C, Murphy PJ. Mucins and ocular signs in symp￾tomatic and asymptomatic contact lens wear. Optom Vis Sci 2008;85:
E930e8.
[299] Pult H, Purslow C, Berry M, Murphy PJ. Clinical tests for successful contact
lens wear: relationship and predictive potential. Optom Vis Sci 2008;85:
E924e9.
[300] Meller D, Tseng SC. Conjunctivochalasis: literature review and possible
pathophysiology. Surv Ophthalmol 1998;43:225e32.
[301] Pult H, Riede-Pult BH, Murphy PJ. The relation between blinking and
conjunctival folds and dry eye symptoms. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90:1034e9.
[302] Pult H, Murphy PJ, Purslow C. A novel method to predict dry eye symptoms
in new contact lens wearers. Optom Vis Sci 2009;86:E1042e50.
[303] Nemeth J, Fodor E, Lang Z, Kosina-Hagy o K, Berta A, Kom ar T, et al. Lid￾parallel conjunctival folds (LIPCOF) and dry eye: a multicentre study. Br J
Ophthalmol 2012.
[304] Sickenberger W, Pult H, Sickenberger B. LIPCOF and contact lens wearers - a
new tool of forecast subjective dryness and degree of comfort of contact lens
wearers. Contactologia 2000;22:74e9.
[305] Markoulli M, Carnt N, Jalbert I, Keay L, Naduvilath T, Papas E. Resolution and
clinical characteristics of conjunctival “Flaps”. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2007;48. ARVO E-Abstract: 5391.
[306] Thota S, Perrigin J, Miller W, Leach N, Bergmanson J, Back A. Conjunctival
Flaps in silicone hydrogel lens wearers. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47.
ARVO E-Abstract: 82.
[307] Graham AD, Truong TN, Lin MC. Conjunctival epithelial flap in continuous
contact lens wear. Optom Vis Sci 2009;86. e324ee31.
[308] Veres A, Tapaszto B, Kosina-Hagyo K, Somfai GM, Nemeth J. Imaging lid￾parallel conjunctival folds with OCT and comparing its grading with the slit
lamp classification in dry eye patients and normal subjects. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:2945e51.
[309] Tapaszto B, Veres A, Kosina-Hagyo K, Somfai GM, Nemeth J. OCT imaging of
lid-parallel conjunctival folds in soft contact lens wearers. Optom Vis Sci
2011.
[310] Lopez Garcia JS, Garcia Lozano I, Martinez Garchitorena J. Lacunar folds study
in dry eye diagnosis. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol 2003;78:21e7.
[311] Viso E, Rodriguez-Ares MT, Boveda FJ, Tourino R, Gude F. Prevalence of
conjunctival shrinkage and its association with dry eye disease: results from
a population-based study in Spain. Cornea 2014;33:442e7.
[312] Alhatem A, Cavalcanti B, Hamrah P. In vivo confocal microscopy in dry eye
disease and related conditions. Semin Ophthalmol 2012;27:138e48.
[313] Villani E, Mantelli F, Nucci P. In-vivo confocal microscopy of the ocular
surface: ocular allergy and dry eye. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;13:
569e76.
[314] Erdelyi B, Kraak R, Zhivov A, Guthoff R, Nemeth J. In vivo confocal laser
scanning microscopy of the cornea in dry eye. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Oph￾thalmol 2007;245:39e44.
[315] Villani E, Magnani F, Viola F, Santaniello A, Scorza R, Nucci P, et al. In vivo
confocal evaluation of the ocular surface morpho-functional unit in dry eye.
Optom Vis Sci 2013;90:576e86.
[316] Wakamatsu TH, Sato EA, Matsumoto Y, Ibrahim OM, Dogru M, Kaido M, et al.
Conjunctival in vivo confocal scanning laser microscopy in patients with
Sjogren syndrome. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51:144e50.
[317] Villani E, Galimberti D, Viola F, Mapelli C, Ratiglia R. The cornea in Sjogren's
syndrome: an in vivo confocal study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48:
2017e22.
[318] Kojima T, Matsumoto Y, Dogru M, Tsubota K. The application of in vivo laser
scanning confocal microscopy as a tool of conjunctival in vivo cytology in the
diagnosis of dry eye ocular surface disease. Mol Vis 2010;16:2457e64.
[319] Benitez del Castillo JM, Wasfy MA, Fernandez C, Garcia-Sanchez J. An in vivo
confocal masked study on corneal epithelium and subbasal nerves in pa￾tients with dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45:3030e5.
[320] Benitez-Del-Castillo JM, Acosta MC, Wassfi MA, Diaz-Valle D, Gegundez JA,
Fernandez C, et al. Relation between corneal innervation with confocal mi￾croscopy and corneal sensitivity with noncontact esthesiometry in patients
with dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007;48:173e81.
[321] Villani E, Galimberti D, Viola F, Mapelli C, Del Papa N, Ratiglia R. Corneal
involvement in rheumatoid arthritis: an in vivo confocal study. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:560e4.
[322] Tuisku IS, Konttinen YT, Konttinen LM, Tervo TM. Alterations in corneal
sensitivity and nerve morphology in patients with primary Sjogren's syn￾drome. Exp Eye Res 2008;86:879e85.
[323] Zhang M, Chen J, Luo L, Xiao Q, Sun M, Liu Z. Altered corneal nerves in
aqueous tear deficiency viewed by in vivo confocal microscopy. Cornea
2005;24:818e24.
[324] Labbe A, Alalwani H, Van Went C, Brasnu E, Georgescu D, Baudouin C. The
relationship between subbasal nerve morphology and corneal sensation in
ocular surface disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:4926e31.
[325] Labbe A, Liang Q, ZWang, Zhang Y, Xu L, Baudouin C, et al. Corneal nerve
structure and function in patients with non-sjogren dry eye: clinical corre￾lations. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:5144e50.
[326] Villani E, Beretta S, Galimberti D, Viola F, Ratiglia R. In vivo confocal mi￾croscopy of conjunctival roundish bright objects: young, older, and Sjogren
subjects. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:4829e32.
[327] Hong J, Zhu W, Zhuang H, Xu J, Sun X, Le Q, et al. In vivo confocal microscopy
of conjunctival goblet cells in patients with Sjogren's syndrome dry eye. Br J
Ophthalmol 2010;94:1454e8.
[328] Le QH, Wang WT, Hong JX, Sun XH, Zheng TY, Zhu WQ, et al. An in vivo
confocal microscopy and impression cytology analysis of goblet cells in pa￾tients with chemical burns. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51:1397e400.
[329] Messmer EM, Torres Suarez E, Mackert MI, Zapp DM, Kampik A. In vivo
confocal microscopy in blepharitis. Klin Monbl Augenheilkd 2005;222:
894e900.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 569
[330] Hong J, Zhu W, Zhuang H, Xu J, Sun X, Le Q, et al. In vivo confocal microscopy
of conjunctival goblet cells in patients with Sjogren syndrome dry eye. Br J
Ophthalmol 2009;94:1454e8.
[331] Colorado LH, Alzahrani Y, Pritchard N, Efron N. Assessment of conjunctival
goblet cell density using laser scanning confocal microscopy versus
impression cytology. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2016;39:221e6.
[332] Nishida T. Neurotrophic mediators and corneal wound healing. Ocul Surf
2005;3:194e202.
[333] Belmonte C, Nichols JJ, Cox SM, Brock JA, Begley CG, Bereiter DA, et al. TFOS
DEWS II Pain and Sensation Report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:404e37.
[334] Cox SM, Nichols JJ. Association between meibomian gland testing and ocular
surface sensitivity. Cornea 2015;34:1187e92.
[335] Wei Y, Asbell PAThe core mechanism of dry eye disease is inflammation. Eye
Contact Lens 2014;40:248e56.
[336] Pflugfelder SC, Huang AJ, Feuer W, Chuchovski PT, Pereira IC, Tseng SC.
Conjunctival cytologic features of primary Sjogren's syndrome. Ophthal￾mology 1990;97:985e91.
[337] Raphael M, Bellefqih S, Piette JC, Le Hoang P, Debre P, Chomette G.
Conjunctival biopsy in Sjogren's syndrome: correlations between histologi￾cal and immunohistochemical features. Histopathology 1988;13:191e202.
[338] Papas EB. Key factors in the subjective and objective assessment of
conjunctival erythema. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:687e91.
[339] Fieguth P, Simpson T. Automated measurement of bulbar redness. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002;43:340e7.
[340] Amparo F, Wang H, Emami-Naeini P, Karimian P, Dana R. The Ocular Redness
Index: a novel automated method for measuring ocular injection. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:4821e6.
[341] Peterson RC, Wolffsohn JS. Objective grading of the anterior eye. Optom Vis
Sci 2009;86:273e8.
[342] Peterson RC, Wolffsohn JS. Sensitivity and reliability of objective image
analysis compared to subjective grading of bulbar hyperaemia. Br J Oph￾thalmol 2007;91:1464e6.
[343] Wolffsohn JS. Incremental nature of anterior eye grading scales determined
by objective image analysis. Br J Ophthalmol 2004;88:1434e8.
[344] Wolffsohn JS, Purslow C. Clinical monitoring of ocular physiology using
digital image analysis. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2003;26:27e35.
[345] Acera A, Rocha G, Vecino E, Lema I, Duran JA. Inflammatory markers in the
tears of patients with ocular surface disease. Ophthalmic Res 2008;40:
315e21.
[346] Chotikavanich S, de Paiva CS, Li de Q, Chen JJ, Bian F, Farley WJ, et al. Pro￾duction and activity of matrix metalloproteinase-9 on the ocular surface
increase in dysfunctional tear syndrome. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;50:
3203e9.
[347] Hadassah J, Bhuvaneshwari N, Rao U, Sehgal PK. Evaluation of succinylated
collagen bandage lenses in corneal healing by the expression of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP-2 and MMP-9) in tear fluid. Ophthalmic Res
2009;42:64e72.
[348] Kaufman HE. The practical detection of mmp-9 diagnoses ocular surface
disease and may help prevent its complications. Cornea 2013;32:211e6.
[349] Tong L, Thumboo J, Tan YK, Wong TY, Albani S. The eye: a window of op￾portunity in rheumatoid arthritis? Nat Rev Rheumatol 2014;10:552e60.
[350] Meadows JF, Dionne K, Nichols KK. Differential profiling of t-cell cytokines as
measured by protein microarray across dry eye subgroups. Cornea 2016;35:
329e35.
[351] Quah JH, Tong L, Barbier S. Patient acceptability of tear collection in the
primary healthcare setting. Optom Vis Sci 2014;91:452e8.
[352] Wei Y, Gadaria-Rathod N, Epstein S, Asbell P. Tear cytokine profile as a
noninvasive biomarker of inflammation for ocular surface diseases: standard
operating procedures. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:8327e36.
[353] Le Guezennec X, Quah J, Tong L, Kim N. Human tear analysis with minia￾turized multiplex cytokine assay on “wall-less” 96-well plate. Mol Vis
2015;21:1151e61.
[354] Benito MJ, Gonzalez-Garcia MJ, Teson M, Garcia N, Fernandez I, Calonge M,
et al. Intra- and inter-day variation of cytokines and chemokines in tears of
healthy subjects. Exp Eye Res 2014;120:43e9.
[355] Malesinski R, Bakunowicz-Lazarczyk A, Wysocka J. The role of chemokines
CCL3/MIP-1 alfa and CCL4/MIP-1 beta in pathogenesis of dry eye syndrome.
Klin Ocz 2008;110:277e9.
[356] Mrugacz M. CCL4/MIP-1beta levels in tear fluid and serum of patients with
cystic fibrosis. J Interferon Cytokine Res 2010;30:509e12.
[357] Yoon KC, Park CS, You IC, Choi HJ, Lee KH, Im SK, et al. Expression of CXCL9,
-10, -11, and CXCR3 in the tear film and ocular surface of patients with dry
eye syndrome. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2010;51:643e50.
[358] Epstein SP, Gadaria-Rathod N, Wei Y, Maguire MG, Asbell PA. HLA-DR
expression as a biomarker of inflammation for multicenter clinical trials of
ocular surface disease. Exp Eye Res 2013;111:95e104.
[359] Baudouin C, Liang H, Riancho L, Ismail D, Deniaud M, Amrane M, et al.
Correlation between the inflammatory marker HLA DR and signs and
symptoms in moderate to severe dry eye disease. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2015;56. 298eCO183.
[360] Williams GP, Tomlins PJ, Denniston AK, Southworth HS, Sreekantham S,
Curnow SJ, et al. Elevation of conjunctival epithelial CD45INTCD11b(þ)
CD16(þ)CD14(-) neutrophils in ocular Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic
epidermal necrolysis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:4578e85.
[361] Sanchez MA, Arriola-Villalobos P, Torralbo-Jimenez P, Giron N, de la Heras B,
Herrero Vanrell R, et al. The effect of preservative-free HP-Guar on dry eye
after phacoemulsification: a flow cytometric study. Eye (Lond) 2010;24:
1331e7.
[362] Guyette N, Williams L, Tran MT, Than T, Bradley J, Kehinde L, et al. Com￾parison of low-abundance biomarker levels in capillary-collected non￾stimulated tears and washout tears of aqueous-deficient and normal
patients. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:3729e37.
[363] Mantopoulos D, Cruzat A, Hamrah P. In vivo imaging of corneal inflamma￾tion: new tools for clinical practice and research. Semin Ophthalmol
2010;25:178e85.
[364] Mastropasqua L, Nubile M, Lanzini M, Carpineto P, Ciancaglini M,
Pannellini T, et al. Epithelial dendritic cell distribution in normal and
inflamed human cornea: in vivo confocal microscopy study. Am J Oph￾thalmol 2006;142:736e44.
[365] Zhivov A, Stachs O, Kraak R, Stave J, Guthoff RF. In vivo confocal microscopy
of the ocular surface. Ocul Surf 2006;4:81e93.
[366] Villani E, Viola F, Sala R, Salvi M, Mapelli C, Curro N, et al. Corneal involve￾ment in Graves' orbitopathy: an in vivo confocal study. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2010;51:4574e8.
[367] Wakamatsu TH, Okada N, Kojima T, Matsumoto Y, Ibrahim OM, Dogru M,
et al. Evaluation of conjunctival inflammatory status by confocal scanning
laser microscopy and conjunctival brush cytology in patients with atopic
keratoconjunctivitis (AKC). Mol Vis 2009;15:1611e9.
[368] Villani E, Beretta S, De Capitani M, Galimberti D, Viola F, Ratiglia R. In vivo
confocal microscopy of meibomian glands in Sjogren's syndrome. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:933e9.
[369] Villani E, Galimberti D, Del Papa N, Nucci P, Ratiglia R. Inflammation in dry
eye associated with rheumatoid arthritis: cytokine and in vivo confocal
microscopy study. Innate Immun 2013;19:420e7.
[370] Kheirkhah A, Rahimi Darabad R, Cruzat A, Hajrasouliha AR, Witkin D,
Wong N, et al. Corneal epithelial immune dendritic cell alterations in sub￾types of dry eye disease: a pilot in vivo confocal microscopic study. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2015;56:7179e85.
[371] Villani E, Garoli E, Termine V, Pichi F, Ratiglia R, Nucci P. Corneal confocal
microscopy in dry eye treated with corticosteroids. Optom Vis Sci 2015;92.
e290e5.
[372] Qazi Y, Kheirkhah A, Blackie C, Cruzat A, Trinidad M, Williams C, et al. In vivo
detection of clinically non-apparent ocular surface inflammation in patients
with meibomian gland dysfunction-associated refractory dry eye symptoms:
a pilot study. Eye (Lond) 2015;29:1099e110.
[373] D'Souza S, Tong L. Practical issues concerning tear protein assays in dry eye.
Eye Vis 2014:1.
[374] Tong L, Zhou XY, Jylha A, Aapola U, Liu DN, Koh SK, et al. Quantitation of 47
human tear proteins using high resolution multiple reaction monitoring
(HR-MRM) based-mass spectrometry. J Proteomics 2015;115:36e48.
[375] Lam SM, Tong L, Duan X, Petznick A, Wenk MR, Shui G. Extensive charac￾terization of human tear fluid collected using different techniques unravels
the presence of novel lipid amphiphiles. J Lipid Res 2014;55:289e98.
[376] Tong L, Petznick A. Correlation between tear matrix metalloproteinases and
the Schirmer's test. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:1592.
[377] Jones L, Downie LE, Korb D, Benitez-del-Castillo JM, Dana R, Deng SX, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Management and Therapy Report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:
575e628.
[378] Novack GD, Asbell P, Barabino B, Bergamini MVW, Ciolino JB, Foulks GN, et al.
TFOS DEWS II Clinical Trial Design Report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:629e49.
[379] Korb DR, Greiner JV, Herman JP, Hebert E, Finnemore VM, Exford JM, et al.
Lid-wiper epitheliopathy and dry-eye symptoms in contact lens wearers.
CLAO J 2002;28:211e6.
[380] Bron AJ, de Paiva CS, Chauhan SK, Bonini S, Gabison EE, Jain S, et al. TFOS
DEWS II Pathophysiology Report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:438e510.
[381] Knop N, Korb DR, Blackie CA, Knop E. The lid wiper contains goblet cells and
goblet cell crypts for ocular surface lubrication during the blink. Cornea
2012;31:668e79.
[382] Navascues-Cornago M, Maldonado-Codina C, Morgan PB. Mechanical sensi￾tivity of the human conjunctiva. Cornea 2014;33:855e9.
[383] Jones L, Varikooty J, Keir N, Soong F, Patel P. The evaluation of lid wiper
epitheliopathy in contact lens wearers in a controlled low humidity envi￾ronmental exposure chamber. ARVO Meet Abstr 2013;54:5475.
[384] Morgan PB, Petropoulos IN, Read ML, Malik RA, Maldonado-Codina C. In vivo
confocal microscopy of the lid margin area of contact lens wearers. BCLA
Conf 2013. Manchester2013.
[385] Varikooty J, Srinivasan S, Subbaraman L, Woods CA, Fonn D, Simpson TL,
et al. Variations in observable lid wiper epitheliopathy (LWE) staining pat￾terns in wearers of silicone hydrogel lenses. Contact Lens Anterior Eye
2015;38:471e6.
[386] Rubio EG. Evaluation of upper eye lid inner marginstaining after using
lubricating eye drops. Contact Lens Anterior Eye 2011;34(Supplement 1):
S17.
[387] Schmidt TA, Sullivan DA, Knop E, Richards SM, Knop N, Liu S, et al. Tran￾scription, translation, and function of lubricin, a boundary lubricant, at the
ocular surface. JAMA Ophthalmol 2013;131:766e76.
[388] Guillon M, Maissa C. Assessment of contact lens wearers' lid margins with
lissamine green. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;50. 6343-.
[389] Shiraishi A, Yamaguchi M, Ohashi Y. Prevalence of upper- and lower-lid￾wiper epitheliopathy in contact lens wearers and non-wearers. Eye Contact
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 570
Lens 2014.
[390] Stahl UG, Delaveris A, Madigan M, Jalbert I. Dallos Award Winner Lid wiper
epitheliopathy: exploring the links to comfort and osmolality in contact lens
wear. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2011;34:S18.
[391] Korb DR, Herman JP, Greiner JV, Scaffidi RC, Finnemore VM, Exford JM, et al.
Lid wiper epitheliopathy and dry eye symptoms. Eye Contact Lens 2005;31:
2e8.
[392] Rubio EG. Dry eye and upper lid margin staining. Contact Lens Spectr
2012;27:44e7.
[393] Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Gouveia SM, Yokoi N, Voon LW. Functional aspects of the
tear film lipid layer. Exp Eye Res 2004;78:347e60.
[394] Yokoi N, Yamada H, Mizukusa Y, Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Kato T, et al. Rheology of
tear film lipid layer spread in normal and aqueous tear-deficient dry eyes.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:5319e24.
[395] Olsen T. Reflectometry of the precorneal film. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh)
1985;63:432e8.
[396] Goto E, Endo K, Suzuki A, Fujikura Y, Matsumoto Y, Tsubota K. Tear evapo￾ration dynamics in normal subjects and subjects with obstructive meibo￾mian gland dysfunction. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:533e9.
[397] Remeseiro B, Penas M, Barreira N, Mosquera A, Novo J, Garcia-Resua C.
Automatic classification of the interferential tear film lipid layer using colour
texture analysis. Comput Methods Programs Biomed 2013;111:93e103.
[398] Goto E, Tseng SC. Differentiation of lipid tear deficiency dry eye by kinetic
analysis of tear interference images. Arch Ophthalmol 2003;121:173e80.
[399] King-Smith PE, Fink BA, Fogt N. Three interferometric methods for
measuring the thickness of layers of the tear film. Optom Vis Sci 1999;76:
19e32.
[400] Licznerski TJ, Kasprzak HT, Kowalik W. Analysis of shearing interferograms
of tear film using fast fourier transforms. J Biomed Opt 1998;3:32e7.
[401] Szczesna DH, Iskander DR. Robust estimation of tear film surface quality in
lateral shearing interferometry. J Biomed Opt 2009;14:064039.
[402] Szczesna DH, Kasprzak HT. Numerical analysis of interferograms for evalu￾ation of tear film build-up time. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 2009;29:211e8.
[403] Szczesna-Iskander DH, Iskander DR, Read SA, Alonso-Caneiro D. Noninvasive
in vivo assessment of soft contact lens type on tear film surface quality.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2012;53:525e31.
[404] Jester JV, Rife L, Nii D, Luttrull JK, Wilson L, Smith RE. In vivo biomicroscopy
and photography of meibomian glands in a rabbit model of meibomian gland
dysfunction. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1982;22:660e7.
[405] Robin JB, Jester JV, Nobe J, Nicolaides N, Smith RE. In vivo transillumination
biomicroscopy and photography of meibomian gland dysfunction. A clinical
study. Ophthalmology 1985;92:1423e6.
[406] Mathers WD, Shields WJ, Sachdev MS, Petroll WM, Jester JV. Meibomian
gland dysfunction in chronic blepharitis. Cornea 1991;10:277e85.
[407] Mathers WD, Daley T, Verdick R. Video imaging of the meibomian gland.
Arch Ophthalmol 1994;112:448e9.
[408] Yokoi N, Komuro A, Yamada H, Maruyama K, Kinoshita S. A newly developed
video-meibography system featuring a newly designed probe. Jpn J Oph￾thalmol 2007;51:53e6.
[409] Arita R, Itoh K, Inoue K, Amano S. Noncontact infrared meibography to
document age-related changes of the meibomian glands in a normal popu￾lation. Ophthalmology 2008/05/03:911e5. ed2008.
[410] Arita R, Itoh K, Maeda S, Maeda K, Amano S. A newly developed noninvasive
and mobile pen-shaped meibography system. Cornea 2012.
[411] Pult H, Riede-Pult BH. Non-contact meibography: keep it simple but effec￾tive. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2012;35:77e80.
[412] Srinivasan S, Menzies K, Sorbara L, Jones L. Infrared imaging of meibomian
gland structure using a novel keratograph. Optom Vis Sci 2012;89:788e94.
[413] Nichols JJ, Berntsen DA, Mitchell GL, Nichols KK. An assessment of grading
scales for meibography images. Cornea 2005;24:382e8.
[414] Shimazaki J, Sakata M, Tsubota K. Ocular surface changes and discomfort in
patients with meibomian gland dysfunction. Arch Ophthalmol 1995;113:
1266e70.
[415] Mathers WD, Billborough M. Meibomian gland function and giant papillary
conjunctivitis. Am J Ophthalmol 1992;114:188e92.
[416] Pflugfelder SC, Tseng SC, Sanabria O, Kell H, Garcia CG, Felix C, et al. Evalu￾ation of subjective assessments and objective diagnostic tests for diagnosing
tear-film disorders known to cause ocular irritation. Cornea 1998;17:38e56.
[417] Koh YW, Celik T, Lee HK, Petznick A, Tong L. Detection of meibomian glands
and classification of meibography images. J Biomed Opt 2012;17:086008.
[418] Pult H, Riede-Pult BH, Nichols JJ. Relation between upper and lower lids'
meibomian gland morphology, tear film, and dry eye. Optom Vis Sci
2012;89:E310e5.
[419] Arita R, Suehiro J, Haraguchi T, Shirakawa R, Tokoro H, Amano S. Objective
image analysis of the meibomian gland area. Br J Ophthalmol 2014;98:
746e55.
[420] Ban Y, Shimazaki-Den S, Tsubota K, Shimazaki J. Morphological evaluation of
meibomian glands using noncontact infrared meibography. Ocul Surf
2013;11:47e53.
[421] Arita R, Suehiro J, Haraguchi T, Maeda S, Maeda K, Tokoro H, et al. Topical
diquafosol for patients with obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction. Br J
Ophthalmol 2013;97:725e9.
[422] Arita R, Morishige N, Shirakawa R, Sato Y, Amano S. Effects of eyelid warming
devices on tear film parameters in normal subjects and patients with mei￾bomian gland dysfunction. Ocul Surf 2015;13:321e30.
[423] Arita R, Itoh K, Maeda S, Maeda K, Furuta A, Fukuoka S, et al. Proposed
diagnostic criteria for obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction. Ophthal￾mology 2009;116. 2058e63 e1.
[424] Finis D, Ackermann P, Pischel N, Konig C, Hayajneh J, Borrelli M, et al.
Evaluation of meibomian gland dysfunction and local distribution of mei￾bomian gland atrophy by non-contact infrared meibography. Curr Eye Res
2015;40:982e9.
[425] Lemp MA, Crews LA, Bron AJ, Foulks GN, Sullivan BD. Distribution of
aqueous-deficient and evaporative dry eye in a clinic-based patient cohort: a
retrospective study. Cornea 2012;31:472e8.
[426] Eom Y, Lee JS, Kang SY, Kim HM, Song JS. Correlation between quantitative
measurements of tear film lipid layer thickness and meibomian gland loss in
patients with obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction and normal controls.
Am J Ophthalmol 2013;155. 1104e10 e2.
[427] Arita R, Morishige N, Koh S, Shirakawa R, Kawashima M, Sakimoto T, et al.
Increased tear fluid production as a compensatory response to meibomian
gland loss: a multicenter cross-sectional study. Ophthalmology 2015;122:
925e933.
[428] Pult H, Riede-Pult B. Comparison of subjective grading and objective
assessment in meibography. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2013;36:22e7.
[429] Arita R, Itoh K, Maeda S, Maeda K, Tomidokoro A, Amano S. Efficacy of
diagnostic criteria for the differential diagnosis between obstructive mei￾bomian gland dysfunction and aqueous deficiency dry eye. Jpn J Ophthalmol
2010;54:387e91.
[430] Arita R, Itoh K, Inoue K, Kuchiba A, Yamaguchi T, Amano S. Contact lens wear
is associated with decrease of meibomian glands. Ophthalmology 2009;116:
379e84.
[431] Bron AJ, Benjamin L, Snibson GR. Meibomian gland disease. Classification
and grading of lid changes. Eye (Lond) 1991;5(Pt 4):395e411.
[432] Mathers WD, Shields WJ, Sachdev MS, Petroll WM, Jester JV. Meibomian
gland morphology and tear osmolarity: changes with Accutane therapy.
Cornea 1991;10:286e90.
[433] Blackie CA, Korb DR. The diurnal secretory characteristics of individual
meibomian glands. Cornea 2010;29:34e8.
[434] Shimazaki J, Goto E, Ono M, Shimmura S, Tsubota K. Meibomian gland
dysfunction in patients with Sjogren syndrome. Ophthalmology 1998;105:
1485e8.
[435] Henriquez AS, Korb DR. Meibomian glands and contact lens wear. Br J
Ophthalmol 1981;65:108e11.
[436] Blackie CA, Korb DR. Recovery time of an optimally secreting meibomian
gland. Cornea 2009;28:293e7.
[437] Korb DR, Blackie CA. Meibomian gland diagnostic expressibility: correlation
with dry eye symptoms and gland location. Cornea 2008;27:1142e7.
[438] Knop E, Knop N, Zhivov A, Kraak R, Korb DR, Blackie C, et al. The lid wiper
and muco-cutaneous junction anatomy of the human eyelid margins: an
in vivo confocal and histological study. J Anat 2011;218:449e61.
[439] Knop E, Korb DR, Blackie CA, Knop N. The lid margin is an underestimated
structure for preservation of ocular surface health and development of dry
eye disease. Dev Ophthalmol 2010;45:108e22.
[440] Randon M, Liang H, El Hamdaoui M, Tahiri R, Batellier L, Denoyer A, et al.
In vivo confocal microscopy as a novel and reliable tool for the diagnosis of
Demodex eyelid infestation. Br J Ophthalmol 2015;99:336e41.
[441] Kojima T, Ishida R, Sato EA, Kawakita T, Ibrahim OM, Matsumoto Y, et al.
In vivo evaluation of ocular demodicosis using laser scanning confocal mi￾croscopy. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:565e9.
[442] Randon M, Liang H, Abbas R, Michee S, Denoyer A, Baudouin C, et al. A new
classification for meibomian gland diseases with in vivo confocal micro￾scopy. J Fr Ophtalmol 2016;39:239e47.
[443] Villani E, Ceresara G, Beretta S, Magnani F, Viola F, Ratiglia R. In vivo confocal
microscopy of meibomian glands in contact lens wearers. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci 2011;52:5215e9.
[444] Ban Y, Ogawa Y, Ibrahim OM, Tatematsu Y, Kamoi M, Uchino M, et al.
Morphologic evaluation of meibomian glands in chronic graft-versus-host
disease using in vivo laser confocal microscopy. Mol Vis 2011;17:2533e43.
[445] Ibrahim OM, Matsumoto Y, Dogru M, Adan ES, Wakamatsu TH, Shimazaki J,
et al. In vivo confocal microscopy evaluation of meibomian gland dysfunc￾tion in atopic-keratoconjunctivitis patients. Ophthalmology 2012;119:
1961e8.
[446] Agnifili L, Fasanella V, Costagliola C, Ciabattoni C, Mastropasqua R,
Frezzotti P, et al. In vivo confocal microscopy of meibomian glands in
glaucoma. Br J Ophthalmol 2013;97:343e9.
[447] Villani E, Canton V, Magnani F, Viola F, Nucci P, Ratiglia R. The aging Mei￾bomian gland: an in vivo confocal study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54:
4735e40.
[448] Matsumoto Y, Shigeno Y, Sato EA, Ibrahim OM, Saiki M, Negishi K, et al. The
evaluation of the treatment response in obstructive meibomian gland dis￾ease by in vivo laser confocal microscopy. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol
2009;247:821e9.
[449] Villani E, Garoli E, Canton V, Pichi F, Nucci P, Ratiglia R. Evaluation of a novel
eyelid-warming device in meibomian gland dysfunction unresponsive to
traditional warm compress treatment: an in vivo confocal study. Int Oph￾thalmol 2015;35:319e23.
[450] Linton RG, Curnow DH, Riley WJ. The meibomian glands: an investigation
into the secretion and some aspects of the physiology. Br J Ophthalmol
1961;45:718e23.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 571
[451] Knop N, Knop E. Meibomian glands. Part I: anatomy, embryology and his￾tology of the Meibomian glands. Ophthalmologe 2009;106:872e83.
[452] McMonnies CW. Incomplete blinking: exposure keratopathy, lid wiper epi￾theliopathy, dry eye, refractive surgery, and dry contact lenses. Cont Lens
Anterior Eye 2007;30:37e51.
[453] Cruz AA, Garcia DM, Pinto CT, Cechetti SP. Spontaneous eyeblink activity.
Ocul Surf 2011;9:29e41.
[454] Doane MG. Blinking and the mechanics of the lacrimal drainage system.
Ophthalmology 1981;88:844e51.
[455] Carney LG, Hill RM. The nature of normal blinking patterns. Acta Ophthalmol
1982;60:427e33.
[456] Forst G. Structure of the tear film during the blinking process. Ophthalmic
Physiol Opt 1987;7:81e3.
[457] Nakamori K, Odawara M, Nakajima T, Mizutani T, Tsubota K. Blinking is
controlled primarily by ocular surface conditions. Am J Ophthalmol
1997;124:24e30.
[458] Rambold H, Sprenger A, Helmchen C. Effects of voluntary blinks on saccades,
vergence eye movements, and saccade-vergence interactions in humans. J
Neurophysiol 2002;88:1220e33.
[459] Varikooty J, Srinivasan S, Chan A, Subbaraman L, Woods CA, Simpson T, et al.
Clinical manifestations of upper lid staining in adapted silicone hydrogel lens
wearers.
[460] Knop E, Knop N, Schirra F. Meibomian glands. Part II: physiology, charac￾teristics, distribution and function of meibomian oil. Ophthalmologe
2009;106:884e92.
[461] Craig JP, Wang MT, Kim D, Lee JM. Exploring the predisposition of the asian
eye to development of dry eye. Ocul Surf 2016;14:385e92.
[462] Abelson MB, Holly FJ. A tentative mechanism for inferior punctate keratop￾athy. Am J Ophthalmol 1977;83:866e9.
[463] Doane MG. Interactions of eyelids and tears in corneal wetting and the dy￾namics of the normal human eyeblink. Am J Ophthalmol 1980;89:507e16.
[464] Collins MJ, Iskander DR, Saunders A, Hook S, Anthony E, Gillon R. Blinking
patterns and corneal staining. Eye Contact Lens 2006;32:287e93.
[465] Doughty MJ. Consideration of three types of spontaneous eyeblink activity in
normal humans: during reading and video display terminal use, in primary
gaze, and while in conversation. Optom Vis Sci 2001;78:712e25.
[466] King DC, Michels KM. Muscular tension and the human blink rate. J Exp
Psychol 1957;53:113e6.
[467] Zaman ML, Doughty MJ, Button NF. The exposed ocular surface and its
relationship to spontaneous eyeblink rate in elderly caucasians. Exp Eye Res
1998;67:681e6.
[468] Sun WS, Baker RS, Chuke JC, Rouholiman BR, Hasan SA, Gaza W, et al. Age￾related changes in human blinks. Passive and active changes in eyelid ki￾nematics. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1997;38:92e9.
[469] Blackie CA, Korb DR. A novel lid seal evaluation: the Korb-Blackie light test.
Eye Contact Lens 2015;41:98e100.
[470] Tsubota K, Hata S, Okusawa Y, Egami F, Ohtsuki T, Nakamori K. Quantitative
videographic analysis of blinking in normal subjects and patients with dry
eye. Arch Ophthalmol 1996;114:715e20.
[471] Karson CN, Burns RS, LeWitt PA, Foster NLR.P.Newman. Blink rates and
disorders of movement. Neurology 1984;34:677e8.
[472] Tsubota K, Nakamori K. Dry eyes and video display terminals. N Engl J Med
1993;328:584.
[473] Pult H, Murphy P, Riede-Pult BH. Velocity of upper lid in spontaneous
complete blinks and dry eye. BCLA Conf 2014. Birmingham.
[474] Pult H. What actually happens to your contact lens when you blink. BCLA
Conf 2015. Liverpool.
[475] Pult H, Korb DR, Murphy PJ, Riede-Pult BH, Blackie C. A new model of central
lid margin apposition and tear film mixing in spontaneous blinking. Contact
Lens Anterior Eye 2015;38:173e80.
[476] Norn MS. Conjunctival sensitivity in normal eyes. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh)
1973;51:58e66.
[477] Norn MS. Conjunctival sensitivity in pathological cases, with simultaneous
measurement of corneal and lid margin sensitivity. Acta Ophthalmol
(Copenh) 1975;53:450e7.
[478] McGowan DP, Lawrenson JG, Ruskell GL. Touch sensitivity of the eyelid
margin and palpebral conjunctiva. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1994;72:
57e60.
[479] Golebiowski B, Chim K, So J, Jalbert I. Lid margins: sensitivity, staining,
meibomian gland dysfunction, and symptoms. Optom Vis Sci 2012;89:
1443e9.
[480] Tomlinson A, Bron AJ, Korb DR, Amano S, Paugh JR, Pearce EI, et al. The in￾ternational workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of the diag￾nosis subcommittee. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:2006e49.
[481] Woods CADK, Jones L, Fonn D. Patient use of smartphones to communicate
subjective data in clinical trials. Optom Vis Sci 2011;88:290e4.
[482] Lienert JP, Tarko L, Uchino M, Christen WG, Schaumberg DA. Long-term
Natural History of Dry Eye Disease from the Patient's Perspective. Ophthal￾mology 2016;123:425e33.
[483] Geerling G, Tauber J, Baudouin C, E.Goto, Matsumoto Y, O'Brien T, et al. The
international workshop on meibomian gland dysfunction: report of the
subcommittee on management and treatment of meibomian gland
dysfunction. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2011;52:2050e64.
[484] Efron N, Brennan NA, Morgan PB, Wilson T. Lid wiper epitheliopathy. Prog
Retin Eye Res 2016;53:140e74.
[485] Walker PM, Lane KJ, Ousler 3rd GW, Abelson MB. Diurnal variation of vi￾sual function and the signs and symptoms of dry eye. Cornea 2010;29:
607e12.
[486] Doughty MJ, Fonn D, Richter D, Simpson T, Caffery B, Gordon K. A patient
questionnaire approach to estimating the prevalence of dry eye symptoms in
patients presenting to optometric practices across Canada. Optom Vis Sci
1997;74:624e31.
[487] Voulgarelis M, Skopouli FN. Clinical, immunologic, and molecular factors
predicting lymphoma development in Sjogren's syndrome patients. Clin Rev
Allergy Immunol 2007;32:265e74.
[488] Bonini S. Atopic keratoconjunctivitis. Allergy 2004;59(Suppl 78):71e3.
[489] Kubicka-Trzaska A, Romanowska-Dixon B. Dry eye syndrome and allergic
conjunctivitiseepidemics of XXI centuryediagnostic problems and man￾agement. Przeglad Lek 2009;66:967e71.
[490] Akil H, Celik F, Ulas F, Kara IS. Dry Eye Syndrome and Allergic Conjunctivitis
in the Pediatric Population. Middle East Afr J Ophthalmol 2015;22:467e71.
[491] Bousquet J, Schunemann HJ, Fonseca J, Samolinski B, Bachert C,
Canonica GW, et al. MACVIA-ARIA Sentinel NetworK for allergic rhinitis
(MASK-rhinitis): the new generation guideline implementation. Allergy
2015;70:1372e92.
[492] Seidman MD, Gurgel RK, Lin SY, Schwartz SR, Baroody FM, Bonner JR, et al.
Clinical practice guideline: Allergic rhinitis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2015;152:S1e43.
[493] Bonini M, Gramiccioni C, Fioretti D, Ruckert B, Rinaldi M, Akdis C, et al.
Asthma, allergy and the Olympics: a 12-year survey in elite athletes. Curr
Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;15:184e92.
[494] Welch D, Ousler 3rd GW, Nally LA, Abelson MB, Wilcox KA. Ocular drying
associated with oral antihistamines (loratadine) in the normal population-an
evaluation of exaggerated dose effect. Adv Exp Med Biol 2002;506:1051e5.
[495] Gomes JAP, Azar DT, Baudouin C, Efron N, Hirayama M, Horwath-Winter J,
et al. TFOS DEWS II Iatrogenic Report. Ocul Surf 2017;15:511e38.
[496] Bielory L. Ocular toxicity of systemic asthma and allergy treatments. Curr
Allergy Asthma Rep 2006;6:299e305.
[497] Friedman T, Friedman Z, Neumann E. Giant papillary conjunctivitis following
cataract extraction. Ann Ophthalmol 1984;16:50e2.
[498] Chen JJ, Applebaum DS, Sun GS, Pflugfelder SC. Atopic keratoconjunctivitis: A
review. J Am Acad Dermatol 2014;70:569e75.
[499] Cornish KS, Gregory ME, Ramaesh K. Systemic cyclosporin A in severe atopic
keratoconjunctivitis. Eur J Ophthalmol 2010;20:844e51.
[500] Akpek EK, Dart JK, Watson S, Christen W, Dursun D, Yoo S, et al.
A randomized trial of topical cyclosporin 0.05% in topical steroid-resistant
atopic keratoconjunctivitis. Ophthalmology 2004;111:476e82.
[501] Akova YA, Rodriguez A, Foster CS. Atopic keratoconjunctivitis. Ocular
Immunol Inflamm 1994;2:125e44.
[502] Onguchi T, Dogru M, Okada N, Kato NA, Tanaka M, Takano Y, et al. The
impact of the onset time of atopic keratoconjunctivitis on the tear function
and ocular surface findings. Am J Ophthalmol 2006;141:569e71.
[503] Dogru M, Katakami C, Nakagawa N, Tetsumoto K, Yamamoto M. Impression
cytology in atopic dermatitis. Ophthalmology 1998;105:1478e84.
[504] Power WJ, Tugal-Tutkun I, Foster CS. Long-term follow-up of patients with
atopic keratoconjunctivitis. Ophthalmology 1998;105:637e42.
[505] Guglielmetti S, Dart JK, Calder V. Atopic keratoconjunctivitis and atopic
dermatitis. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;10:478e85.
[506] Bielory B, Bielory L. Atopic dermatitis and keratoconjunctivitis. Immunol
Allergy Clin N Am 2010;30:323e36.
[507] Villani E, Strologo MD, Pichi F, Luccarelli SV, De Cilla S, Serafino M, et al. Dry
Eye in Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis: A Cross-Sectional Comparative Study.
Medicine 2015;94:e1648.
[508] Vichyanond P, Pacharn P, Pleyer U, Leonardi A. Vernal keratoconjunctivitis: a
severe allergic eye disease with remodeling changes. Pediatr Allergy
Immunol 2014;25:314e22.
[509] Bonini S, Coassin M, Aronni S, Lambiase A. Vernal keratoconjunctivitis. Eye
(Lond) 2004;18:345e51.
[510] Lee SW, Lee SC, Jin KH. Conjunctival Inclusion Cysts in Long-standing Chronic
Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis. Korean J Ophthalmol 2007;21:251e4.
[511] Leonardi A, Piliego F, Castegnaro A, Lazzarini D, La Gloria Valerio A,
Mattana P, et al. Allergic conjunctivitis: a cross-sectional study. Clin Exp
Allergy 2015;45:1118e25.
[512] Maranhao AG, Soares CC, Albuquerque MC, Santos N. Molecular epidemi￾ology of adenovirus conjunctivitis in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, between 2004
and 2007. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo 2009;51:227e9.
[513] Lynch 3rd JP, Fishbein M, Echavarria M. Adenovirus. Seminars Respir Crit
Care Med 2011;32:494e511.
[514] Alfonso SA, Fawley JD, Alexa Lu X. Conjunctivitis. Prim Care 2015;42:
325e45.
[515] Sheppard JD, Wertheimer MLScoper SV. Modalities to decrease stromal
herpes simplex keratitis reactivation rates. Arch Ophthalmol 2009;127:
852e6.
[516] Yawn BP, Wollan PC, St Sauver JL, Butterfield LC. Herpes zoster eye com￾plications: rates and trends. Mayo Clin Proc 2013;88:562e70.
[517] Henle G, Henle W, Clifford P, Diehl V, Kafuko GW, Kirya BG, et al. Antibodies
to Epstein-Barr virus in Burkitt's lymphoma and control groups. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1969;43:1147e57.
[518] Wong KW, D'Amico DJ, Hedges 3rd TR, Soong HK, Schooley RT, Kenyon KR.
Ocular involvement associated with chronic Epstein-Barr virus disease. Arch
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 572
Ophthalmol 1987;105:788e92.
[519] Matoba AY. Ocular disease associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection. Surv
Ophthalmol 1990;35:145e50.
[520] Sambursky R, Trattler W, Tauber S, Starr C, Friedberg M, Boland T, et al.
Sensitivity and specificity of the AdenoPlus test for diagnosing adenoviral
conjunctivitis. JAMA Ophthalmol 2013;131:17e22.
[521] Orden Martinez B, Martinez Ruiz R, Millan Perez R. Bacterial conjunctivitis:
most prevalent pathogens and their antibiotic sensitivity. An Pediatr (Barc)
2004;61:32e6.
[522] Sugita G, Hotomi M, Sugita R, Kono M, Togawa A, Yamauchi K, et al. Genetic
characteristics of Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae
isolated from children with conjunctivitis-otitis media syndrome. J Infect
Chemother 2014;20:493e7.
[523] Pflugfelder SC, Karpecki PM, Perez VL. Treatment of blepharitis: recent
clinical trials. Ocul Surf 2014;12:273e84.
[524] Panel ACEDP. Blepharitis PPP. Am Acad Ophthalmol 2013.
[525] McCulley JP, Dougherty JM, Deneau DG. Classification of chronic blepharitis.
Ophthalmology 1982;89:1173e80.
[526] Baum J. Clinical manifestations of dry eye states. Trans Ophthalmol Soc U. K
1985;104(Pt 4):415e23.
[527] Post CF, Juhlin E. Demodex Folliculorum and Blepharitis. Arch Dermatol
1963;88:298e302.
[528] Hom MM, Mastrota KM, Schachter SE. Demodex. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90:
e198e205.
[529] Liu J, Sheha H, Tseng SC. Pathogenic role of Demodex mites in blepharitis.
Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;10:505e10.
[530] Kamoun B, Fourati M, Feki J, Mlik M, Karray F, Trigui A, et al. Blepharitis due
to Demodex: myth or reality? J Fr Ophtalmol 1999;22:525e7.
[531] Gutgesell VJ, Stern GA, Hood CI. Histopathology of meibomian gland
dysfunction. Am J Ophthalmol 1982;94:383e7.
[532] Arrua M, Samudio M, Farina N, Cibils D, Laspina F, Sanabria R, et al.
Comparative study of the efficacy of different treatment options in patients
with chronic blepharitis. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol 2015;90:112e8.
[533] Thode AR, Latkany RA. Current and Emerging Therapeutic Strategies for the
Treatment of Meibomian Gland Dysfunction (MGD). Drugs 2015;75:
1177e85.
[534] Jalbert I, Rejab S. Increased numbers of Demodex in contact lens wearers.
Optom Vis Sci 2015;92:671e8.
[535] Norn MS. Incidence of Demodex Folliculorum on skin of lids and nose. Acta
Ophthalmol 1982;60:575e83.
[536] Liang LY, Ding XH, Tseng SCG. High Prevalence of Demodex brevis Infesta￾tion in Chalazia. Am J Ophthalmol 2014;157:342e8.
[537] Wolf R, Ophir J, Avigad J, Lengy J, Krakowski A. The hair follicle mites
(Demodex spp.). Could they be vectors of pathogenic microorganisms? Acta
Derm Venereol 1988;68:535e7.
[538] Bevins CL, Liu FT. Rosacea: skin innate immunity gone awry? Nat Med
2007;13:904e6.
[539] Gao YY, Di Pascuale MA, Elizondo A, Tseng SC. Clinical treatment of ocular
demodecosis by lid scrub with tea tree oil. Cornea 2007;26:136e43.
[540] Kheirkhah A, Casas V, Li W, Raju VK, Tseng SC. Corneal manifestations of
ocular demodex infestation. Am J Ophthalmol 2007;143:743e9.
[541] Murube J. Demodex hominis. Ocul Surf 2015.
[542] Mastrota KM. Method to identify Demodex in the eyelash follicle without
epilation. Optom Vis Sci 2013;90. e172e4.
[543] Krasny J, Hruba D, Netukova M. The role of Chlamydia pneumoniae in the
etiology of keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS). Recent Pat Inflamm Allergy Drug
Discov 2014;8:216e22.
[544] Blodi BA, Byrne KA, Tabbara KF. Goblet cell population among patients with
inactive trachoma. Int Ophthalmol 1988;12:41e5.
[545] Kim BY, Riaz KM, Bakhtiari P, Chan CC, Welder JD, Holland EJ, et al. Medically
reversible limbal stem cell disease: clinical features and management stra￾tegies. Ophthalmology 2014;121:2053e8.
[546] Pisella PJ, Pouliquen P, Baudouin C. Prevalence of ocular symptoms and signs
with preserved and preservative free glaucoma medication. Br J Ophthalmol
2002;86:418e23.
[547] Dua HS, Watson NJ, Mathur RM, Forrester JV. Corneal epithelial cell migra￾tion in humans: 'hurricane and blizzard keratopathy'. Eye (Lond) 1993;7(Pt
1):53e8.
[548] Nelson JD. Superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis (SLK). Eye (Lond) 1989;3(Pt
2):180e9.
[549] Culbertson WW, Tseng SC. Corneal disorders in floppy eyelid syndrome.
Cornea 1994;13:33e42.
[550] Di Pascuale MA, Espana EM, Kawakita T, Tseng SC. Clinical characteristics of
conjunctivochslasis with or without aqueous teas deficiency. Br J Oph￾thalmol 2004;88:388e92.
[551] Murube J. Characteristics and etiology of conjunctivochalasis: historical
perspective. Ocul Surf 2005;3:7e14.
[552] Saw VP, Dart JK. Ocular mucous membrane pemphigoid: diagnosis and
management strategies. Ocul Surf 2008;6:128e42.
[553] Sobolewska B, Deuter C, Zierhut M. Current medical treatment of ocular
mucous membrane pemphigoid. Ocul Surf 2013;11:259e66.
[554] Kohanim S, Palioura S, Saeed HN, Akpek EK, Amescua G, Basu S, et al. Ste￾vens-Johnson Syndrome/Toxic Epidermal NecrolysiseA Comprehensive Re￾view and Guide to Therapy. I. Systemic Disease. Ocul Surf 2016;14:2e19.
[555] Zaidman GW, Geeraets R, Paylor RR, Ferry AP. The histopathology of
filamentary keratitis. Arch Ophthalmol 1985;103:1178e81.
[556] Albietz J, Sanfilippo P, Troutbeck R, Lenton LM. Management of filamentary
keratitis associated with aqueous-deficient dry eye. Optom Vis Sci 2003;80:
420e30.
[557] Schwartz GS, Harrison AR, Holland EJ. Etiology of immune stromal (inter￾stitial) keratitis. Cornea 1998;17:278e81.
[558] Heigle TJ, Pflugfelder SC. Aqueous tear production in patients with neuro￾trophic keratitis. Cornea 1996;15:135e8.
[559] Goins KM. New insights into the diagnosis and treatment of neurotrophic
keratopathy. Ocul Surf 2005;3:96e110.
[560] Siu GD, Young AL, Jhanji V. Alternatives to corneal transplantation for the
management of bullous keratopathy. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2014;25:
347e52.
[561] Henrich CF, Ramulu PY, Akpek EK. Association of dry eye and inflammatory
systemic diseases in a tertiary care-based sample. Cornea 2014;33:819e25.
[562] Kruszka P, O'Brian RJ. Diagnosis and management of Sjogren syndrome. Am
Fam Physician 2009;79:465e70.
[563] Baldini C, Pepe P, Luciano N, Ferro F, Talarico R, Grossi S, et al. A clinical
prediction rule for lymphoma development in primary Sjogren's syndrome. J
Rheumatol 2012;39:804e8.
[564] Shiboski SC, Shiboski CH, Criswell L, Baer A, Challacombe S, Lanfranchi H,
et al. American College of Rheumatology classification criteria for Sjogren's
syndrome: a data-driven, expert consensus approach in the Sjogren's In￾ternational Collaborative Clinical Alliance cohort. Arthritis Care Res (Hobo￾ken) 2012;64:475e87.
[565] Matossian C, Micucci J. Characterization of the serological biomarkers asso￾ciated with Sjogren's syndrome in patients with recalcitrant dry eye disease.
Clin Ophthalmol 2016;10:1329e34.
[566] Aakre BM, Doughty MJ. Are there differences between 'visual symptoms' and
specific ocular symptoms associated with video display terminal (VDT) use?
Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2007;30:174e82.
[567] Blehm C, Vishnu S, Khattak A, Mitra S, Yee RW. Computer vision syndrome: a
review. Surv Ophthalmol 2005;50:253e62.
[568] Chu C, Rosenfield M, Portello JK, Benzoni JA, Collier JD. A comparison of
symptoms after viewing text on a computer screen and hardcopy.
Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 2011;31:29e32.
[569] Chu CA, Rosenfield M, Portello JK. Blink patterns: reading from a computer
screen versus hard copy. Optom Vis Sci 2014;91:297e302.
[570] Balasubramaniam SC, Raja H, Nau CB, Shen JF, Schornack MM. Ocular Graft￾Versus-Host Disease: A Review. Eye Contact Lens 2015;41:256e61.
[571] Ferrara JL, Levine JE, Reddy P, Holler E. Graft-versus-host disease. Lancet
(Lond) 2009;373:1550e61.
[572] Hessen M, Akpek EK. Ocular graft-versus-host disease. Curr Opin Allergy Clin
Immunol 2012;12:540e7.
[573] Lin X, Cavanagh HD. Ocular manifestations of graft-versus-host disease: 10
years' experience. Clin Ophthalmol 2015;9:1209e13.
[574] Papas EB, Ciolino JB, Jacobs D, Miller WL, Pult H, Sahin A, et al. The TFOS
International Workshop on Contact Lens Discomfort: report of the man￾agement and therapy subcommittee. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013;54.
Tfos183e203.
[575] Ayaki M, Kawashima M, Negishi K, Tsubota K. High prevalence of sleep and
mood disorders in dry eye patients: survey of 1,000 eye clinic visitors.
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 2015;11:889e94.
[576] Szakats I, Sebestyen M, Nemeth J, Birkas E, Purebl G. The Role of Health
Anxiety and Depressive Symptoms in Dry Eye Disease. Curr Eye Res 2015:
1e6.
[577] Labbe A, Wang YX, Jie Y, Baudouin C, Jonas JB, Xu L. Dry eye disease, dry eye
symptoms and depression: the Beijing Eye Study. Br J Ophthalmol 2013;97:
1399e403.
[578] Hallak JA, Tibrewal S, Jain S. Depressive Symptoms in Patients With Dry Eye
Disease: A Case-Control Study Using the Beck Depression Inventory. Cornea
2015;34:1545e50.
[579] Na KS, Han K, Park YG, Na C, Joo CK. Depression, Stress, Quality of Life, and
Dry Eye Disease in Korean Women: A Population-Based Study. Cornea
2015;34:733e8.
[580] van der Vaart R, Weaver MA, Lefebvre C, Davis RM. The association between
dry eye disease and depression and anxiety in a large population-based
study. Am J Ophthalmol 2015;159:470e4.
[581] Galor A, Covington D, Levitt AE, McManus KT, Seiden B, Felix ER, et al.
Neuropathic Ocular Pain due to Dry Eye Is Associated With Multiple Co￾morbid Chronic Pain Syndromes. J Pain 2016;17:310e8.
[582] Galor A, Feuer W, Lee DJ, Florez H, Faler AL, Zann KL, et al. Depression, post￾traumatic stress disorder, and dry eye syndrome: a study utilizing the na￾tional United States Veterans Affairs administrative database. Am J Oph￾thalmol 2012;154. 340e6 e2.
[583] Vickers ER, Cousins MJ. Neuropathic orofacial pain. Part 2-Diagnostic pro￾cedures, treatment guidelines and case reports. Aust Endod J 2000;26:
53e63.
[584] Morreale M, Marchione P, Giacomini P, Pontecorvo S, Marianetti M, Vento C,
et al. Neurological involvement in primary Sjogren syndrome: a focus on
central nervous system. PLoS One 2014;9:e84605.
[585] Epstein LC, Masse G, Harmatz JS, Scott TM, Papas AS, Greenblatt DJ. Char￾acterization of cognitive dysfunction in Sjogren's syndrome patients. Clin
Rheumatol 2014;33:511e21.
[586] Strombeck B, Ekdahl C, Manthorpe R, Wikstr € om I, Jacobsson L. Health-related €
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 573
quality of life in primary Sjogren's syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis and € fi-
bromyalgia compared to normal population data using SF-36. Scand J
Rheumatol 2000;29:20e8.
[587] von Thun Und Hohenstein-Blaul N, Funke S, Grus FH. Tears as a source of
biomarkers for ocular and systemic diseases. Exp Eye Res 2013;117:126e37.
[588] Willcox MD, Zhao Z, Naduvilath T, Lazon de la Jara P. Cytokine changes in
tears and relationship to contact lens discomfort. Mol Vis 2015;21:293e305.
[589] Laguna M, Holgado M, Hernandez AL, Santamaria B, Lavin A, Soria J, et al.
Antigen-Antibody Affinity for Dry Eye Biomarkers by Label Free Biosensing.
Comparison with the ELISA Technique. Sensors (Basel) 2015;15:19819e29.
[590] Macri A, Scanarotti C, Bassi AM, Giuffrida S, Sangalli G, Traverso CE, et al.
Evaluation of oxidative stress levels in the conjunctival epithelium of pa￾tients with or without dry eye, and dry eye patients treated with preser￾vative-free hyaluronic acid 0.15 % and vitamin B12 eye drops. Graefes Arch
Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2015;253:425e30.
[591] Braun RJ, Gewecke NR, Begley CG, King-Smith PE, Siddique JI. A model for
tear film thinning with osmolarity and fluorescein. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2014;55:1133e42.
[592] Varikooty J, Keir N, Simpson T. Estimating tear film spread and stability
through tear hydrodynamics. Optom Vis Sci 2012;89:E1119e24.
[593] Shaheen BS, Bakir M, Jain S. Corneal nerves in health and disease. Surv
Ophthalmol 2014;59:263e85.
J.S. Wolffsohn et al. / The Ocular Surface 15 (2017) 539e574 574
