THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 75
The Definition and Classification of Dry Eye Disease:
Report of the Definition and Classification Subcommittee of 
the International Dry Eye WorkShop (2007)
DEWS Definition and Classification
©2007 Ethis Communications, Inc. The Ocular Surface ISSN: 1542-
0124. (No authors listed). The definition and classification of dry eye 
disease: report of the Definition and Classification Subcommittee of 
the International Dry Eye WorkShop (2007). 2007;5(2):75-92.
ABSTRACT The aim of the DEWS Definition and Classifica￾tion Subcommittee was to provide a contemporary definition 
of dry eye disease, supported within a comprehensive clas￾sification framework. A new definition of dry eye was devel￾oped to reflect current understanding of the disease, and the 
committee recommended a three-part classification system. 
The first part is etiopathogenic and illustrates the multiple 
causes of dry eye. The second is mechanistic and shows how 
each cause of dry eye may act through a common pathway. 
It is stressed that any form of dry eye can interact with and 
exacerbate other forms of dry eye, as part of a vicious circle. 
Finally, a scheme is presented, based on the severity of the 
dry eye disease, which is expected to provide a rational basis 
for therapy. These guidelines are not intended to override the 
clinical assessment and judgment of an expert clinician in 
individual cases, but they should prove helpful in the conduct 
of clinical practice and research.
KEYWORDS definition, DEWS, dry eye disease, Dry Eye 
WorkShop, etiopathogenesis, mechanism, severity grading
I. INTRODUCTION
he Definition and Classification Subcommittee 
reviewed previous definitions and classification 
schemes for dry eye, as well as the current clinical 
and basic science literature that has increased and clarified 
knowledge of the factors that characterize and contribute to 
dry eye. Based on its findings, the Subcommittee presents 
herein an updated definition of dry eye and classifications 
based on etiology, mechanisms, and severity of disease.
II. GOALS OF THE DEFINITION AND 
CLASSIFICATION SUBCOMMITTEE
The goals of the DEWS Definition and Classification 
Subcommittee were to develop a contemporary definition of 
dry eye disease and to develop a three-part classification of 
dry eye, based on etiology, mechanisms, and disease stage. 
The manner of working of the committee is outlined in 
the introduction to this issue of The Ocular Surface. Further 
details are published on the TFOS-DEWS web-site (www.
tearfilm.org).
III. DEFINITION OF DRY EYE DISEASE
The committee reviewed the definition and classifica￾tion presented at the 1995 National Eye Institute (NEI)/In￾dustry Dry Eye Workshop, which was: Dry eye is a disorder 
of the tear film due to tear deficiency or excessive evaporation, 
which causes damage to the interpalpebral ocular surface and 
is associated with symptoms of ocular discomfort.
1
The committee agreed that the definition could be 
improved in the light of new knowledge about the roles of 
tear hyperosmolarity and ocular surface inflammation in 
dry eye and the effects of dry eye on visual function. Initially 
two definitions were developed and presented to members 
of the workshop. These “general” and “operational” defini￾tions overlapped to some extent, and, therefore, in this final 
report, these versions have been combined to produce the 
following definition: 
Dry eye is a multifactorial disease of the tears and ocu￾lar surface that results in symptoms of discomfort,2-4
visual disturbance,5-7 and tear film instability8-10 with 
potential damage to the ocular surface. It is accompa￾nied by increased osmolarity of the tear film11-14 and 
inflammation of the ocular surface.15,16
T
Accepted for publication January 2007. 
Definition and Classfication Subcommittee members: Michael A. Lemp, MD 
(Chair); Christophe Baudouin, MD, PhD; Jules Baum, MD; Murat Dogru, 
MD; Gary N. Foulks, MD; Shigeru Kinoshita, MD; Peter Laibson, MD; James 
McCulley, MD; Juan Murube, MD, PhD; Stephen C. Pflugfelder, MD; Maurizio 
Rolando, MD; Ikuko Toda, MD.
The Subcommittee is indebted to Professors A.J. Bron and G.N. Foulks for 
their invaluable contributions to the writing of this report.
Proprietary interests of Subcommittee members are disclosed on pages 202 
and 204.
Reprints are not available. Articles can be accessed at: www.tearfilm.org
Correspondence in regard to the this chapter should be addressed to Michael 
A. Lemp, MD, 4000 Cathedral Avenue NW, Apt 828B, Washington, DC 20016 
(Email: malemp@lempdc.com. Tel: 202-338-6424)
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 76 
Dry eye is recognized as a disturbance of the Lacrimal 
Functional Unit (LFU), an integrated system comprising 
the lacrimal glands, ocular surface (cornea, conjunctiva 
and meibomian glands) and lids, and the sensory and mo￾tor nerves that connect them.17 Trigeminal sensory fibers 
arising from the ocular surface run to the superior salivary 
nucleus in the pons, from whence efferent fibers pass, in the 
nervus intermedius, to the pterygopalatine ganglion. Here, 
postganglionic fibers arise, which terminate in the lacrimal 
gland, nasopharynx, and vessels of the orbit. Another neural 
pathway controls the blink reflex, via trigeminal afferents 
and the somatic efferent fibers of the seventh cranial nerve. 
Higher centers feed into the brainstem nuclei, and there is 
a rich sympathetic supply to the epithelia and vasculature 
of the glands and ocular surface.
This functional unit controls the major components 
of the tear film in a regulated fashion and responds to 
environmental, endocrinological, and cortical influences. 
Its overall function is to preserve the integrity of the tear 
film, the transparency of the cornea, and the quality of the 
image projected onto the retina.17-20 At the 2007 Dry Eye 
WorkShop, it was noted that the corneal and conjunctival 
epithelia are in continuity, through ductal epithelia, with 
the acinar epithelia of the main and accessory lacrimal 
glands and the meibomian glands, which themselves arise 
as specialized invaginations from the ocular surface. Also, 
these epithelia have the same embryological derivation. This 
broader concept, which has additional features, has been 
termed the Ocular Surface System and is discussed further 
in the “Research” chapter of this issue.21
An important aspect of the unit is the part played by 
sensory impulses, which arise from the ocular surface, in the 
maintenance of resting tear flow. Currently, it is considered 
that waking tear flow is a reflex response to afferent im￾pulses deriving particularly, but not entirely, from the ocular 
surface.22 Sensory input from the nasal mucosa also makes 
a contribution.23 Disease or damage to any component of 
the LFU (the afferent sensory nerves, the efferent autonomic 
and motor nerves, and the tear-secreting glands) can desta￾bilize the tear film and lead to ocular surface disease that 
expresses itself as dry eye. Tear film stability, a hallmark of 
the normal eye, is threatened when the interactions between 
stabilizing tear film constituents are compromised by de￾creased tear secretion, delayed clearance, and altered tear 
composition. Ocular surface inflammation is a secondary 
consequence. Reflex tear secretion in response to ocular 
irritation is envisioned as the initial compensatory mecha￾nism, but, with time, inflammation accompanying chronic 
secretory dysfunction and a decrease in corneal sensation 
eventually compromises the reflex response and results in 
even greater tear film instability. Perturbation of the LFU 
is considered to play an important role in the evolution of 
different forms of dry eye.
The distinctions aqueous-deficient dry eye and evaporative 
dry eye were removed from the definition, but are retained 
in the etiopathogenic classification.
IV. CLASSIFICATION OF DRY EYE DISEASE
A. Background 
Vitali, writing about the harmonized classification crite￾ria for Sjogren syndrome (SS) remarked that classification 
criteria are not necessarily appropriate for use in diagnosis 
and may lead to misclassification of a disease, particularly 
in its early stages.24 In an individual patient, a classification 
scheme can provide a guide, but an expert clinician, apply￾ing appropriate diagnostic criteria, is needed to establish 
a diagnosis. 
Although the NEI/Industry Workshop classification1 has 
served as a useful and durable scheme for over a decade, it 
does not reflect newer knowledge on pathophysiological 
mechanisms, effects on vision, and the utility of an assess￾ment of severity of disease. Recently, two new classification 
schemes were published, and these were used as source 
documents by the committee. These include: the Triple 
Classification25,26 and the report of the Delphi panel.27
The Triple Classification evolved from reports presented 
OUTLINE
 I. Introduction
 II. Goals of the Definition and Classification 
Subcommittee
 III. Definition of dry eye disease
 IV. Classification of dry eye disease
A. Background
B. Etiopathogenic classification of dry eye disease
1. Aqueous tear-deficient dry eye
a. Sjogren syndrome dry eye
b. Non-Sjogren syndrome dry eye
1) Primary lacrimal gland deficiencies
2) Secondary lacrimal gland deficiencies
3) Obstruction of the lacrimal gland ducts
4) Reflex hyposecretion
a) Reflex sensory block
b) Reflex motor block
2. Evaporative dry eye
a. Intrinsic causes
1) Meibomian gland dysfunction
2) Disorders of lid aperature and lid/globe 
congruity or dynamics
3) Low blink rate
b. Extrinsic causes
1) Ocular surface disorders
2) Contact lens wear
3) Ocular surface disease
4) Allergic conjunctivitis
C. The causative mechanisms of dry eye
1. Tear hyperosmolarity
2. Tear film instability
D. The basis for symptoms in dry eye
E. Classification of dry eye based on severity
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 77
DRY EYE
Effect of the
Environment
Milieu Interieur
Low blink rate
 behavior, VTU,
 microscopy
Wide lid aperture
 gaze position
Aging
Low androgen pool
Systemic Drugs:
 antihistamines,
 beta-blockers,
 antispasmodics,
 diuretics, and 
 some psychotropic
 drugs
Milieu Exterieur
Low relative humidity
High wind velocity
Occupational
 environment 
Aqueous-deficient
Sjogren
Syndrome
Dry Eye
Primary
Secondary
Non-Sjogren
Dry Eye
Lacrimal
Deficiency
Reflex Block
Lacrimal
Gland Duct
Obstruction
Systemic
Drugs
Evaporative
Extrinsic
Meibomian Oil
Deficiency
Intrinsic
Vitamin A￾Deficiency
Topical Drugs
Preservatives
Low Blink
Rate
Drug Action
Accutane
Contact Lens
Wear
Disorders
of Lid
Aperture
Ocular Surface
Disease
eg, Allergy
at the 14th Congress of the European Society of Ophthal￾mology.25 After further clinical experience, an updated ver￾sion was published in 2005, which presented three separate 
schemes: one based on etiopathogenesis; one based on the 
glands and tissues targeted in dry eye; and one based on 
disease severity.26
The committee felt that the concept of three different 
schemes serving different purposes was attractive, but it 
was noted that evidence-based referencing was limited. 
For this reason, the scheme as a whole was not adopted, 
but many conceptual aspects were incorporated into the 
committee’s final schemes. 
The Delphi Panel was a consensus group that met to 
review the classification of dry eye.27 The panel proposed 
changing the name of dry eye disease to dysfunctional tear syn￾drome, suggesting that the name more accurately reflected 
pathophysiological events in dry eye. However, although 
the committee felt that the term embraced the essential 
features of the disease, they concluded that retention of the 
name dry eye had much to recommend it and that its use 
was embedded in the literature. The committee also rejected 
a subdivision based on the presence or absence of lid dis￾ease, because it is frequently difficult to identify the relative 
contribution of lid disease to a particular case of dry eye. 
The majority of the Definition and Classification Sub￾committee was in favor of adopting a severity grading based 
on the report of the Delphi Panel, recognizing it as a com￾prehensive approach that could form the basis of therapy 
according to severity of the disease. As noted above, the 
Triple Classification also presented a severity grading. 
B. Etiopathogenic Classification of Dry Eye Disease
The etiopathogenic classification developed by the 
Subcommittee is an updated version of that presented in 
the NEI/Industry Workshop Report and reflects a more 
contemporary understanding of dry eye disease (Figure 1). 
Figure 1. Major etiological causes of dry eye. 
The left hand box illustrates the influence of environment on the risk of an individual to develop dry eye. The term “environment” is used 
broadly, to include bodily states habitually experienced by an individual, whether it reflects their “milieu interieur” or is the result of exposure 
to external conditions which represent the “milieu exterieur.” This background may influence the onset and type of dry eye disease in an 
individual, which may be aqueous-deficient or evaporative in nature. 
Aqueous-deficient dry eye has two major groupings, Sjogren syndrome dry eye and non-Sjogren syndrome dry eye. 
Evaporative dry eye may be intrinsic, where the regulation of evaporative loss from the tear film is directly affected, eg, by meibomian lipid 
deficiency, poor lid congruity and lid dynamics, low blink rate, and the effects of drug action, such as that of systemic retinoids. Extrinsic 
evaporative dry eye embraces those etiologies that increase evaporation by their pathological effects on the ocular surface. Causes include 
vitamin A deficiency, the action of toxic topical agents such as preservatives, contact lens wear and a range of ocular surface diseases, 
including allergic eye disease. Further details are given in the text.
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 78 
As in the 1995 report, the term dry eye is regarded as syn￾onymous with the term keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS).
The classification has the following features: 
The left hand box in Figure 1 illustrates the influence of 
environment on an individual’s risk of developing dry eye. 
The term environment is used broadly to include physiologi￾cal variation between individuals (their milieu interieur), as 
well as the ambient conditions that they encounter (their 
milieu exterieur).
The milieu interieur implies physiological conditions 
particular to an individual that could influence their risk 
of dry eye. For instance, a normal subject may have a low 
natural blink rate, or the blink rate may be slowed for be￾havioral or psychological reasons.28 Slowing of the blink 
rate increases the blink interval and increases the period 
of evaporative loss between each blink.29
Similarly, the natural height of the palpebral aperture in 
the primary position varies between individuals and between 
ethnic groups.30 The aperture is also wider in upgaze than 
downgaze.31 Evaporative loss per eye increases with increas￾ing palpebral width and is, therefore, increased in upgaze.32
Extensive evidence supports a role for the sex hormones 
in the etiology of dry eye33 with the generalization that low 
levels of androgens and high estrogen levels are risk factors 
for dry eye. Biologically active, androgens promote lacrimal 
and meibomian gland function.33 Androgen deficiency is 
associated with dry eye34 and may be prevented by topical 
or systemic androgen therapy.35-38 Dry eye occurs in patients 
exposed to anti-androgens in the treatment of prostatic 
cancer,39,40 and women with complete androgen insensitiv￾ity syndrome show an increase in the signs and symptoms 
of dry eye, associated with evidence of meibomian gland 
and goblet cell dysfunction.41-43 A significantly depleted 
androgen pool in “non-autoimmune” dry eye associated 
with meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD) has been re￾ported.44 Also, as noted elsewhere in this issue,45 female 
sex and postmenopausal estrogen therapy are important 
risk factors for dry eye,46,47 and women with premature 
ovarian failure suffer from the symptoms and signs of dry 
eye, although their tear production is not affected.48
Lacrimal tear secretion is reduced by a number of 
systemic drugs, and these effects may be looked upon as 
disturbances of the milieu interieur. Their details are dis￾cussed later in this report. Aging is associated with physi￾ological changes that may predispose to dry eye, including 
decreased tear volume and flow, increased osmolarity,49
decreased tear film stability,50 and alterations in the com￾position of the meibomian lipids.51
The milieu exterieur involves the occupational and 
external environments, which may represent risk factors 
for the development of dry eye. Evaporative water loss 
from the eye is increased in conditions of low relative 
humidity, occurring either as part of natural variation at 
different geographic locations or in special circumstances 
created by air-conditioning, air travel, or other artificial 
environments.52 Similarly, tear evaporation is increased by 
exposure to high wind velocity, and this mechanism has 
been incorporated into some of the newer experimental 
models of dry eye. 
Occupational factors may cause a slow blink rate, repre￾senting a risk for dry eye in those working with video dis￾play terminals.53 Other activities associated with decreased 
blinking and an increase in palpebral width, including that 
associated with upgaze, have been reported to carry a risk 
for the development of dry eye symptoms. 
The major classes of dry eye, as in the 1995 workshop,1
are still held to be aqueous tear-deficient dry eye (ADDE) 
and evaporative dry eye (EDE). The category ADDE refers 
chiefly to a failure of lacrimal secretion, and this approach is 
retained. However, it should be recognized that a failure of 
water secretion by the conjunctiva could also contribute to 
aqueous tear deficiency. The class EDE has been subdivided 
to distinguish those causes that are dependent on intrinsic 
conditions of the lids and ocular surface and those that arise 
from extrinsic influences.
Dry eye can be initiated in any of these classes, but they 
are not mutually exclusive. It is recognized that disease initi￾ated in one major subgroup may coexist with or even lead 
to events that cause dry eye by another major mechanism. 
This is part of a vicious circle of interactions that can amplify 
the severity of dry eye. An example might be that all forms 
of dry eye cause goblet cell loss and that this, in turn, will 
contribute to loss of tear film stability, to surface damage 
and evaporative water loss, and to symptoms resulting from 
a loss of lubrication and surface inflammatory events.
The major classes and subclasses of dry eye are de￾scribed below.
1. Aqueous Tear-Deficient Dry Eye (Tear Deficient 
Dry Eye; Lacrimal Tear Deficiency) 
Aqueous tear-deficient dry eye implies that dry eye is 
due to a failure of lacrimal tear secretion. In any form of 
dry eye due to lacrimal acinar destruction or dysfunction, 
dryness results from reduced lacrimal tear secretion and 
volume.54,55 This causes tear hyperosmolarity, because, 
although the water evaporates from the ocular surface at 
normal rates, it is from a reduced aqueous tear pool. Tear 
film hyperosmolarity causes hyperosmolarity of the ocular 
surface epithelial cells and stimulates a cascade of inflam￾matory events involving MAP kinases and NFkB signalling 
pathways56,57 and the generation of inflammatory cytokines 
(interleukin (IL)-1A ; -1B ; tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-A ) 
and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-9).58 When lacrimal 
dysfunction is due to lacrimal gland infiltration and inflam￾mation, inflammatory mediators generated in the gland are 
assumed to find their way into the tears and be delivered 
to the ocular surface. However, when such mediators are 
detected in the tears, it is not usually possible to know 
whether they derive from the lacrimal gland itself or from 
the ocular surface (conjunctiva and cornea).
It is uncertain whether evaporation is reduced59 or in￾creased59-64 in ADDE. It is possible that this is determined 
by the stage of the disease. Some studies suggest that the 
reservoir of lid oil is larger in non-Sjogren syndrome dry 
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 79
eye (NSSDE)65 and that the tear film lipid layer is thicker,66
but dynamic studies of the tear film lipid layer in ADDE 
have shown that spreading of the lipid layer is delayed in 
the interblink.67,68 Additionally, in severe ADDE, spread￾ing may be undetectable by interferometry, suggesting a 
major defect in the tear film lipid layer. Delayed or absent 
spreading of the tear film could lead to an increase in water 
loss from the eye.
ADDE has two major subclasses, SS dry eye (SSDE) 
and non-SS dry eye.
a. Sjogren Syndrome Dry Eye
Sjogren syndrome is an exocrinopathy in which the 
lacrimal and salivary glands are targeted by an autoimmune 
process; other organs are also affected. The lacrimal and 
salivary glands are infiltrated by activated T-cells, which 
cause acinar and ductular cell death and hyposecretion 
of the tears or saliva. Inflammatory activation within the 
glands leads to the expression of autoantigens at the surface 
of epithelial cells (eg, fodrin, Ro and La)69 and the retention 
of tissue-specific CD4 and CD8 T-cells.70 Hyposecretion is 
amplified by a potentially reversible neurosecretory block, 
due to the effects of locally released inflammatory cytokines 
or to the presence of circulating antibodies (eg, anti-M3 
antibody) directed against 
muscarinic receptors with￾in the glands.71-73
There are two forms 
of SS, and classification 
criteria have recently been 
harmonized in a European￾American collaboration.74
Primary SS consists of the 
occurrence of ADDE in 
combination with symp￾toms of dry mouth, in the 
presence of autoantibod￾ies, evidence of reduced 
salivary secretion and with 
a positive focus score on 
minor salivary gland bi￾opsy.75,76 Details of the cri￾teria are presented in Table 
1. Secondary SS consists of 
the features of primary SS 
together with the features 
of an overt autoimmune 
connective disease, such as 
rheumatoid arthritis, which 
is the most common, or 
systemic lupus erythema￾tosis, polyarteritis nodosa, 
Wegener’s granulomatosis, 
systemic sclerosis, primary 
biliary sclerosis, or mixed 
connective tissue disease. 
Diagnostic criteria for each 
of these connective tissue disorders have been published.77
The precise triggers leading to autoimmune acinar 
damage are not known in full, but risk factors include 
genetic profile,78 androgen status79 (a low androgen pool 
favoring an inflammatory environment within the target 
tissues), and exposure to environmental agents, ranging 
from viral infections affecting the lacrimal gland to polluted 
environments. A nutritional deficiency in omega-3- and 
other unsaturated fatty acids and unsupplemented intake 
of vitamin C has also been reported in patients with SS.80
It is generally accepted that environmental factors leading 
to increased evaporative water loss from the eye (eg, low 
humidity, high wind velocity, and increased exposure of the 
ocular surface) may act as a trigger by invoking inflamma￾tory events at the ocular surface through a hyperosmolar 
mechanism (see Section V). 
The ocular dryness in SSDE is due to lacrimal hypose￾cretion and the accompanying characteristic inflammatory 
changes in the lacrimal gland, together with the presence 
of inflammatory mediators in the tears and within the 
conjunctiva.81 It is not known whether the conjunctival 
changes are due to an autoimmune targeting of this tissue 
or whether they are due to the effect of inflammatory media￾tors released from the lacrimal glands into the tears. 
Table 1. Revised international classification criteria for ocular manifestations of Sjogren 
syndrome
I. Ocular symptoms: a positive response to at least one of the following questions: 
1. Have you had daily, persistent, troublesome dry eyes for more than 3 months? 
2. Do you have a recurrent sensation of sand or gravel in the eyes? 
3. Do you use tear substitutes more than 3 times a day? 
II. Oral symptoms: a positive response to at least one of the following questions: 
1. Have you had a daily feeling of dry mouth for more than 3 months? 
2. Have you had recurrently or persistently swollen salivary glands as an adult? 
3. Do you frequently drink liquids to aid in swallowing dry food? 
III. Ocular signs: that is, objective evidence of ocular involvement defined as a positive result 
for at least one of the following two tests: 
1. Schirmer I test, performed without anesthesia (a 5 mm in 5 minutes) 
2. Rose bengal score or other ocular dye score (q 4 according to van Bijsterveld’s scoring 
system) 
IV. Histopathology: In minor salivary glands (obtained through normal-appearing mucosa) focal 
lymphocytic sialoadenitis, evaluated by an expert histopathologist, with a focus score q1, 
defined as a number of lymphocytic foci (which are adjacent to normal-appearing mucous 
acini and contain more than 50 lymphocytes) per 4 mm2 of glandular tissue18
V. Salivary gland involvement: objective evidence of salivary gland involvement defined by a 
positive result for at least one of the following diagnostic tests: 
1. Unstimulated whole salivary flow (a 1.5 ml in 15 minutes) 
2. Parotid sialography showing the presence of diffuse sialectasias (punctate, cavitary or 
destructive pattern), without evidence of obstruction in the major ducts19 
3. Salivary scintigraphy showing delayed uptake, reduced concentration and/or delayed 
excretion of tracer20
VI. Autoantibodies: presence in the serum of the following autoantibodies: 
1. Antibodies to Ro(SSA) or La(SSB) antigens, or both
Reprinted with permission from: Vitali C, Bombardieri S, Jonnson R, et al. Classification criteria for Sjogren’s 
syndrome: a revised version of the European criteria proposed by the American-European Consensus Group. 
Ann Rheum Dis 2002;1:554-8.
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 80 
The frequency of MGD is higher in patients with SS 
than in the normal population; thus, a defective tear film 
lipid layer may contribute to dry eye by leading to excess 
evaporation.82
b. Non-Sjogren Syndrome Dry Eye 
Non-Sjogren syndrome dry eye is a form of ADDE due 
to lacrimal dysfunction, where the systemic autoimmune 
features characteristic of SSDE have been excluded. The 
most common form is age-related dry eye, to which the 
term KCS has sometimes been applied in the past. However, 
as noted earlier, the term KCS is now used to describe any 
form of dry eye. In the 1995 Dry Eye Workshop report, it 
was referred to as primary lacrimal disease,
1 but this term has 
not been generally adopted. The different forms of NSSDE 
are briefly discussed below (Table 2).
1) Primary Lacrimal Gland Deficiencies
Age-Related Dry Eye (ARDE): There is some uncertainty 
as to whether tear dynamics are affected by age in the 
normal population.83 Mathers et al showed significant age￾related correlations for tear evaporation, volume, flow, and 
osmolarity,49 but no such relationship was noted by Craig 
and Tomlinson84 or in other reports of tear turnover,85
tear evaporation86,87 and lipid layer.88 ARDE is a primary 
disease. 
With increasing age in the normal human population, 
there is an increase in ductal pathology that could promote 
lacrimal gland dysfunction by its obstructive effect.89,89a 
These alterations include periductal fibrosis, interacinar 
fibrosis, paraductal blood vessel loss and acinar cell 
atrophy.89,89a Damato et al found lymphocytic glandular 
infiltrates in 70% of lacrimal glands studied and consid￾ered this to be the basis of the fibrosis. Appearances were 
likened to the less severe grades of Sjogren syndrome. They 
postulated a sequence of periductal fibrosis, interacinar 
fibrosis and, finally, acinar atrophy. It has been suggested 
that the low-grade dacryoadenitis could be caused by 
systemic infection or conjunctivitis89 or, alternatively, that 
subclinical conjunctivitis might be responsible for stenosis 
of the excretory ducts.89a
Congenital Alacrima: Congenital alacrima is a rare cause 
of dry eye in youth.90 It is also part of certain syndromes,91
including the autosomal recessive, triple A syndrome (All￾grove syndrome), in which congenital alacrima is associated 
with achalasia of the cardia, Addison’s disease, central neu￾rodegeneration, and autonomic dysfunction. It is caused by 
mutations in the gene encoding the protein ALADIN, which 
plays a role in RNA and/or protein trafficking between the 
nucleus and cytoplasm.92,93
Familial Dysautonomia: Lacrimal dysfunction is a major 
feature of the autosomal recessive disorder, familial dys￾autonomia (Riley Day syndrome), in which a generalized 
insensitivity to pain is accompanied by a marked lack of 
both emotional and reflex tearing, within a multisystem 
disorder. There is a developmental and progressive neuronal 
abnormality of the cervical sympathetic and parasympa￾thetic innervations of the lacrimal gland and a defective 
sensory innervation of the ocular surface, which affects both 
small myelinated (AD ) and unmyelinated (C) trigeminal 
neurons.94,95 The chief mutation affects the gene encoding 
an IK B kinase-associated protein.
2) Secondary Lacrimal Gland Deficiencies
Lacrimal gland infiltration: Lacrimal secretion may fail 
because of inflammatory infiltration of the gland, as in: 
Sarcoidosis: Infiltration of the lacrimal gland by sarcoid 
granulomata may cause dry eye.96
Lymphoma: Infiltration of the lacrimal gland by lym￾phomatous cells causes dry eye.97
AIDS: Dry eye may be caused by lacrimal gland infiltra￾tion by T-cells. However, in AIDS-related dry eye, unlike 
the situation in SSDE, there is a predominance of CD8 
suppressor cells, rather than CD4, helper cells.98
Graft vs host disease (GVHD): Dry eye is a common 
complication of GVHD disease, occurring typically around 
6 months after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. It 
is caused in part by lacrimal gland fibrosis due to colocali￾Table 2. Conditions associated with non-Sjogren 
syndrome dry eye
Primary lacrimal gland deficiencies
 Age-related dry eye 
Congenital alacrima
 Familial dysautonomia
Secondary lacrimal gland deficiencies
 Lacrimal gland infiltration
 Sarcoidosis
 Lymphoma
 AIDS
 Graft vs host disease
 Lacrimal gland ablation
 Lacrimal gland denervation
Obstruction of the lacrimal gland ducts
 Trachoma
 Cicatricial pemphigoid and mucous membrane pemphigoid
 Erythema multiforme
 Chemical and thermal burns
Reflex hyposecretion
 Reflex sensory block
 Contact lens wear
 Diabetes
 Neurotrophic keratitis
 Reflex motor block 
 VII cranial nerve damage
 Multiple neuromatosis
 Exposure to systemic drugs
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 81
zation of periductal T-lymphocytes (CD4 and CD8) with 
antigen-presenting fibroblasts.99,100
Lacrimal gland ablation: The ducts of the main lacrimal 
gland pass through its palpebral part, so that excision of 
the palpebral part will be expected to have the same effect 
as excision of the main gland. Dry eye may be caused by 
partial or complete ablation of the lacrimal gland at any 
age, but is not an obligatory consequence, presumably 
because accessory gland and conjunctival secretion may 
compensate in some cases.55 It is, therefore, of interest that 
ablation of the main lacrimal gland in squirrel monkeys, 
while reducing both basal and reflex tear secretion, does 
not in itself lead to dry eye in that species.101
Lacrimal gland denervation: Parasympathetic denerva￾tion of the human lacrimal gland may cause dry eye,102
and, experimentally in the rat, it causes reduced tear flow 
and lacrimal protein secretion and activates inflammatory 
changes in the gland.103 The accessory glands are innervated 
similarly to the main and palpebral lacrimal glands104 and 
are assumed to be under similar reflex control; however, 
evidence for this is lacking. 
3) Obstruction of the Lacrimal Gland Ducts 
Obstruction of the ducts of the main palpebral and ac￾cessory lacrimal glands leads to aqueous-deficient dry eye 
and may be caused by any form of cicatrising conjunctivitis 
(Table 2). In these disorders, it is not uncommon for con￾junctival scarring to cause a cicatricial obstructive MGD. 
In addition, lid deformity influences tear film spreading by 
affecting lid apposition and dynamics. Specific conditions 
are discussed below.
Trachoma: Trachoma is a cause of blindness on a global 
scale, in which corneal opacity and blindness are caused by a 
combination of tarsal and conjunctival scarring, trichiasis and 
a cicatrizing meibomian gland obstruction. Dry eye is part of 
the overall picture, resulting from lacrimal duct obstruction, 
lid malapposition, and a deficient tear film lipid layer.105
Cicatricial pemphigoid and mucous membrane pemphi￾goid: Cicatricial and mucous membrane pemphigoid are 
mucocutaneous disorders characterized by blistering of 
the skin and mucous membranes, leading to severe and 
progressive conjunctival scarring. Dry eye may be caused 
by lacrimal obstruction, cicatricial MGD, and/or poor lid 
apposition.106-108
Erythema multiforme: This is an acute, self-limited muco￾cutaneous disorder usually precipitated by drugs, infection 
or malignancy. Conjunctival scarring can lead to dry eye in 
the manner outlined above.109
Chemical and thermal burns: Diffuse burns may cause 
sufficient scarring to cause dry eye.110
4) Reflex Hyposecretion
a) Reflex Sensory Block (Tables 2 and 3)
Lacrimal tear secretion in the waking state is due in large 
part to a trigeminal sensory input arising chiefly from the 
nasolacrimal passages and the eye. When the eyes open, 
there is an increased reflex sensory drive from the exposed 
ocular surface. A reduction in sensory drive from the ocular 
surface is thought to favor the occurrence of dry eye in two 
ways, first, by decreasing reflex-induced lacrimal secre￾tion, and, second, by reducing the blink rate and, hence, 
increasing evaporative loss.111 Experimental evidence has 
shown that trigeminal denervation in the rabbit modifies 
the regulation of lacrimal protein secretion.112
Bilateral sensory loss reduces both tear secretion and 
blink rate. Bilateral, topical proparacaine decreases the 
blink rate by about 30% and tear secretion by 60-75%.22
It should be kept in mind that part of the reduction in 
secretion may be due to local anesthesia of secretory nerve 
terminals supplying the palpebral and accessory lacrimal 
glands (Belmonte C: personal communication). 
Contact Lens Wear: A reduction in corneal sensitivity oc￾curs in wearers of hard- and extended wear- contact lenses 
(CLs), possibly contributing11,113 to dry eye symptoms in 
this group of patients. In some studies, increased tear osmo￾larity has been recorded in association with CL wear.113,114
In a rabbit model, trigeminal denervation increases tear film 
osmolarity and causes the morphological changes character￾istic of dry eye.115 Similar arguments have been put forward 
to advance the concept of LASIK dry eye116,117; although 
there is evidence to support the concept, counter argu￾ments have been put forward to suggest that at least some 
of the patients who are symptomatic after LASIK surgery 
have a neurotrophic deficiency118 or neuralgic disorder.119
Diabetes: Diabetes mellitus has been identified as a risk 
factor for dry eye in several studies, including large popula￾tion studies.120-123 The prevalence was 18.1% in diabetics 
compared to 14.1% in non-diabetics in the Beaver Dam 
study,121,122 in which the diagnosis of dry eye or dry eye 
symptoms were self-reported. A similar prevalence (diabet￾ics 20.6%, non-diabetics 13.8%) was reported in a study 
based on frequency of use of ocular lubricants.123 This 
Table 3. Causes of ocular sensory loss
Infective
 Herpes simplex keratitis
 Herpes zoster ophthalmicus
Corneal surgery
 Limbal incision (extra-capsular cataract extraction)
 Keratoplasty
 Refractive surgery
 PRK
 LASIK
 RK
Neurotrophic Keratitis
 Vth nerve/ganglion section/injection/compression
Topical agents
 Topical anaesthesia
Systemic medications
 Beta blockers
 Atropine-like drugs
Other causes
 Chronic contact lens wear
 Diabetes mellitus
 Aging
 Trichlorethylene toxicity
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 8282 
study also noted an associa￾tion between poor glycemic 
control (as indicated by 
serum HbA1C) and fre￾quency of drop use. Goeb￾bels124 found a reduction 
in reflex tearing (Schirmer 
test) in insulin-dependent 
diabetics, but no differ￾ence in tear film breakup 
time or basal tear flow by 
fluorophotometry.
It has been suggested 
that the association may be 
due to diabetic sensory or 
autonomic neuropathy, or to 
the occurrence of microvas￾cular changes in the lacrimal 
gland.123
Neurotrophic keratitis: Ex￾tensive sensory denervation of 
the anterior segment, involv￾ing the cornea and the bulbar 
and palpebral conjunctiva, as 
a component of herpes zoster 
ophthalmicus or induced 
by trigeminal nerve section, 
injection, or compression or 
toxicity, can lead to neuro￾trophic keratitis. This condi￾tion is characterized by fea￾tures of dry eye, such as tear 
instability, diffuse punctate 
keratitis, and goblet cell loss, 
and also, most importantly, 
the occurrence of an indolent 
or ulcerative keratitis, which may lead to perforation.115,125
The sensory loss results in a reduction of lacrimal se￾cretion126 and a reduction in blink rate. In addition, it is 
envisaged that there is a loss of trophic support to the ocular 
surface125 after sensory denervation, due to a deficient release 
of substance-P or expression of nerve growth factor.127-131
b) Reflex Motor Block
Central damage to the VII cranial nerve, involving the 
nervus intermedius, leads to dry eye due to loss of lacrimal 
secretomotor function. The nervus intermedius carries 
postganglionic, parasympathetic nerve fibers (of pterygo￾palatine ganglion origin) to the lacrimal gland. Dry eye is 
due to lacrimal hyposecretion in addition to incomplete lid 
closure (lagophthalmos). Multiple neuromatosis has also 
been reported as a cause of dry eye.132
An association between systemic drug use and dry eye 
has been noted in several studies, with decreased lacrimal 
secretion being the likely mechanism. Responsible agents 
include: antihistamines, beta blockers, antispasmodics, and 
diuretics, and, with less certainty, tricyclic antidepressants, 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and other psycho￾tropic drugs.122 Additional associations with drying medica￾tions were reported by Schein et al, unrelated to the disease 
for which they were used.133 Use of ACE (angiotensin 
converting enzyme) inhibitors was associated with a lower 
incidence of dry eye, and no relationship was found with 
calcium channel blockers or cholesterol-lowering drugs.122
2. Evaporative Dry Eye
Evaporative dry eye is due to excessive water loss from 
the exposed ocular surface in the presence of normal lac￾rimal secretory function. Its causes have been described as 
intrinsic, where they are due to intrinsic disease affecting lid 
structures or dynamics, or extrinsic, where ocular surface 
disease occurs due to some extrinsic exposure. The bound￾ary between these two categories is inevitably blurred.
a. Intrinsic Causes
1) Meibomian Gland Dysfunction
Meibomian gland dysfunction, or posterior blepharitis, 
is a condition of meibomian gland obstruction and is the 
Table 4. Meibomian gland diseases causing evaporative dry eye
Category Disease References
Reduced number Congenital deficiency
Acquired—MGD Bron et al137
Replacement Dystichiasis Bron et al137
Dystichiasis lymphedema syndrome Brooks et al138
Kiederman et al139
 Metaplasia 
Meibomian Gland Dysfunction 
Hypersecretory Meibomian seborrhoea Gifford140
 Cowper141
Hyposecretory MGD Retinoid therapy Mathers et al142
Obstructive MGD Primary or secondary Bron et al143
Focal or diffuse Bron et al143
Simple or cicatricial Foulks and Bron134
Atrophic or inflammatory—
note association with dermatoses Pflugfelder et al144
Simple MGD: Primary, or Secondary to: 
 Local disease Anterior blepharitis 
 Systemic disease Acne rosacea; seborrhoeic dermatitis; McCulley Dougherty145
atopy; icthyosis; psoriasis; McCulley146
 Syndromes Anhydrotic ectodermal dysplasia; Baum et al147
ectrodactyly syndrome; Turner syndrome Mondino et al148
 Systemic toxicity 13-cis retinoic acid Mathers et al142
Lambert and Smith149,150
 Polychlorinated biphenyls Ikui151
Ohnishi et al152,153
Epinephrine (rabbit) Jester et al154
Cicatricial MGD: Primary, or Secondary to: 
 Local disease Chemical burns; trachoma; pemphigoid;
erythema multiforme; acne rosacea;
VKC and AKC
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 83 83
most common cause of evaporative dry eye.134-136 Its multi￾ple causes and associations are listed in Table 4 and include 
dermatoses, such as acne rosacea, seborrhoeic dermatitis, 
and atopic dermatitis. Less common but important associa￾tions include the treatment of acne vulgaris with isotretin￾oin, which leads to a reversible meibomian gland atrophy, 
loss of acinar density on meibography, and reduced volume 
and increased viscosity of expressed excreta.142 Additionally, 
exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls, through ingestion of 
contaminated cooking oils, causes a chronic disorder with 
gross and extensive acneiform skin changes, meibomian 
seborrhoea with thick excreta and glandular cyst forma￾tion. Other organs are affected.152,153,155 Meibomian duct 
keratinization occurs in the experimental model.149,150
MGD can be primary or secondary, simple or cicatricial. 
In simple MGD, the gland orifices remain located in the 
skin of the lid, anterior to the mucocutaneous junction. 
In cicatricial MGD, the duct orifices are drawn posteriorly 
onto the lid and tarsal mucosa and, hence, are unable to 
deliver oil to the surface of the tear film. Diagnosis is based 
on morphologic features of the gland acini and duct orifices, 
presence of orifice plugging, and thickening or absence of 
expressed excreta. Methods exist to grade the degree of 
MGD,143 measure the degree of gland dropout (meibogra￾phy),156,157 and the amount of oil in the lid margin reservoir 
(meibometry).65,158 Evidence from several sources suggests 
that MGD of sufficient extent and degree is associated with 
a deficient tear film lipid layer, an increase in tear evapora￾tion, and the occurrence of an evaporative dry eye. 
It is important to recognize the effect of lid commensal 
organisms on meibomian lipid composition and its poten￾tial effect on tear film lipid layer stability. Shine and McCul￾ley have shown that constitutional differences in meibomian 
lipid composition exist in different individuals.159,160 They 
identified one group of subjects with low levels of choles￾terol esters and esters of unsaturated fatty acids (ie, the 
”normal-cholesterol absent” group: N[CA]), and another 
group with high levels of these fractions (”normal-choles￾terol present”’ group: N[CP]). In the latter group, esterases 
and lipases produced by normal lid commensals (coagulase￾negative staphylococci [CoNS], Propionobacterium acnes and 
S aureus) can release fatty acids and mono- and diglycerides 
into the tear film, which may be a source of irritation or 
of soap formation, said to be responsible for producing 
”meibomian foam.”161 It should also be noted that S. aureus
growth can be stimulated by the presence of cholesterol and 
that, in a study by Shine and McCulley, there were twice 
as many staphylococcal strains on the lid margins of those 
normal subjects whose meibomian lipid was cholesterol￾rich, than in the cholesterol-poor group.160 Factors such as 
these may influence the microbial load and type on normal 
lid margins and influence the development of blepharitis. 
2) Disorders of Lid Aperture and Lid/Globe 
Congruity or Dynamic
An increase in the exposed evaporative surface of the 
eye occurs in craniostenosis, endocrine and other forms of 
proptosis, and in high myopia. Endocrine exophthalmos 
and, specifically, increased palpebral fissure width, is as￾sociated with ocular drying and tear hyperosmolarity.162
Increasing palpebral fissure width correlates with increased 
tear film evaporation.61 Increased ocular surface exposure 
also occurs in particular gaze positions, such as upgaze,163
and in activities that induce upgaze, such as playing pool, 
where, while aiming, the head is inclined downward and 
the eyes are in extreme upgaze.
Drying of the ocular surface due to poor lid apposition 
or to lid deformity, leading to exposure or poor tear film re￾surfacing, are accepted causes of ocular surface drying, but 
they have received little formal study.164 Dry eye problems 
may be caused by problems of lid congruity after plastic 
surgery of the lids.165
3) Low Blink Rate
Drying of the ocular surface may be caused by a reduced 
blink rate, which lengthens the period during which the 
ocular surface is exposed to water loss before the next 
blink.166 Methods have been developed to record the blink 
rate and to relate this to the development of dry eye.163 This 
may occur as a physiological phenomenon during perfor￾mance of certain tasks of concentration, eg, working at 
video terminals167 or microscopes, or it may be a feature of 
an extrapyramidal disorder, such as Parkinson disease (PD). 
The reduced blink rate in PD is due to a decrease in 
the dopaminergic neuron pool of the substantia nigra and 
is proportional to disease severity.168 Reduced blink rate is 
regarded by some authors as the basis of dry eye in PD.169
Biousse et al found blink rate and tear film breakup time 
(TFBUT) to be significantly reduced in untreated, early￾onset PD patients with a significantly increased frequency 
of dry eye symptoms, whereas the Schirmer test and rose 
bengal staining measurements were no different in PD pa￾tients than in controls.170 However, other authors report a 
reduced lacrimal secretion in PD,171-173 and abnormalities 
of tear film stability, fluorescein and rose bengal staining, 
tear meniscus height, and meibomian gland function.173
Tamer et al reported dry eye symptoms in 87.5% of 
PD patients versus 20.6% of age-matched controls, with a 
mean total number of abnormal dry eye tests of 3.10 o1.8 
in PD, versus 0.35 o 0.9 in controls. (P < 0.001). Each test 
was significantly abnormal in PD patients versus controls, 
and all the tear tests (except meibomian gland function and 
meniscus height) showed a significant correlation with a PD 
severity index. The overall number of abnormal tests in PD 
patients was inversely related to the blink rate.
On the basis of these findings, Tamer et al postulated 
several mechanisms by which PD may induce dry eye. 1) 
Reduced blink rate and impaired meibomian oil delivery 
to the tear film can increase evaporative loss. They also 
suggest that a reduced blink rate could impair the clear￾ance of lipid-contaminated mucin.174 2) Experimentally, 
androgens are required for the normal functioning of both 
the lacrimal175,176 and meibomian glands, 177,178 and there 
is clinical evidence that dry eye symptoms are promoted by 
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 8484 
blockade of androgen receptors.43 The levels of circulating 
androgens are low in a large proportion of PD patients,179
and it is suggested that this may contribute to lacrimal and 
meibomian dysfunction. 3) In addition, decreased reflex 
tearing in PD has been attributed to autonomic dysfunction, 
reflecting the presence of Lewy bodies in the substantia 
nigra, sympathetic and peripheral parasympathetic gan￾glia.180 Magalhaes et al found evidence of autonomic failure 
in about a third of patients with PD. 
In conclusion, it is possible that dry eye disease in PD 
has multiple causes.
b. Extrinsic Causes
1) Ocular Surface Disorders
Disease of the exposed ocular surface may lead to 
imperfect surface wetting, early tear film breakup, tear 
hyperosmolarity, and dry eye. Causes include vitamin A 
deficiency and the effects of chronically applied topical 
anesthetics and preservatives. 
Vitamin A Deficiency: Vitamin A deficiency may cause 
dry eye (xerophthalmia) by two distinct mechanisms.
Vitamin A is essential for the development of goblet cells 
in mucous membranes and the expression of glycocalyx 
mucins.181,182 These are deficient in xerophthalmia, lead￾ing to an unstable tear film characterized by early tear film 
break up. Vitamin A deficiency can cause lacrimal acinar 
damage, and, therefore, some patients with xerophthalmia 
may have a lacrimal, aqueous tear-deficient dry eye.183
Topical Drugs and Preservatives: Many components of 
eye drop formulations can induce a toxic response from 
the ocular surface. Of these, the most common offenders 
are preservatives, such as benzalkonium chloride (BAC), 
which cause surface epithelial cell damage and punctate 
epithelial keratitis, which interferes with surface wettability. 
Use of preserved drops is an important cause of dry eye 
signs and symptoms in glaucoma patients, and it is usually 
reversible on switching to nonpreserved preparations.184
Therefore, frequent applications of preserved artificial tear 
preparations should be avoided. 
Topical anesthesia causes drying in two ways. It re￾duces lacrimal secretion by reducing sensory drive to the 
lacrimal gland and also reduces the blink rate. It has also 
been suggested that anesthesia of those lacrimal secretory 
nerve terminals close to the surface of the upper fornix 
(innervating the palpebral and accessory portions of the 
lacrimal gland) may also be blocked by topical anaesthetics 
(Belmonte C: personal communication).
Chronic use of topical anesthetics can cause a neuro￾trophic keratitis leading to corneal perforation.185,186
2) Contact Lens Wear
Contact lens wear is prevalent in the developed world, 
with 35 million wearers cited in the USA in the year 
2000.187 The causes of CL-related symptoms and of lens 
intolerance are, therefore, of personal and general economic 
importance. The primary reasons for CL intolerance are 
discomfort and dryness.188,189 In recent years, a number 
of questionnaires have been developed to identify dry eye 
symptoms in CL wearers.45,190-192 Use of such question￾naires has indicated that about 50% of CL wearers report 
dry eye symptoms.191-194 CL wearers are 12 times more 
likely than emmetropes and five times more likely than 
spectacle-wearers to report dry eye symptoms.195
In a large cross-sectional study of CL wearers (91% hy￾drogel and 9% gas permeable lenses), several factors were 
found to be associated with dry eye diagnosed using the 
Contact Lens Dry Eye Questionnaire (CLDEQ). Pre-lens 
tear film (PLTF) thinning time was most strongly associated 
with dry eye (dry eye: 8.23 o 5.67 seconds; non-dry eye: 
11.03 o 8.63 seconds. [P = 0.0006]), followed by nominal 
CL water content and refractive index.114
The pre-lens lipid layer thickness was less in dry eye 
subjects and correlated well with the pre-lens tear film thin￾ning time. This, together with poor lens wettability, could 
be a basis for a higher evaporative loss during lens wear and 
was attributed to potential changes in tear film lipid compo￾sition, rather than to a loss of meibomian gland oil delivery.
Patients wearing high water-content hydrogel lenses were 
more likely to report dry eye. This is a controversial area in 
the literature. In a study of the effects of five hydrogel lenses 
on tear film physiology, Thai et al found that all the examined 
soft CL materials increased the evaporation rate and decreased 
the tear film thinning time.196 The surface wetting ability of 
the CL materials was the same, regardless of special surface 
lens treatments. Efron et al found that patients wearing low 
water CLs, which maintained their hydration, were free from 
symptoms.197 However, other studies reported no correla￾tion between CL hydration and dry eye symptoms189 and no 
relationship between lens hydration and tear film thinning 
time and dry eye symptoms198 or evaporative water loss.199
Dry eye was associated with a higher tear osmolarity, but not 
in the range normally associated with dry eye tear hyperos￾molarity. The authors commented that this lower value might 
have been caused by reflex tearing at the time of sampling.114
Women were found to report dry eye more frequently 
than men, with 40% of the menand 62% of the women clas￾sified as having dry eye (P < 0.0001).114 The reasons for this 
were not explored, but potential contributing factors were 
considered to be hormone fluctuations during the menstrual 
cycle or after menopause and use of oral contraceptives or 
hormone replacement therapy. It was also noted that symp￾tom reporting by women, in general, tends to be higher than 
that by men.200 Some studies show no effect of oral contra￾ceptives or hormone levels on a range of tear parameters.201
Glasson et al202 showed that intolerance to hydrogel 
lenses in normals correlates with a shorter blink interval, 
noninvasive TFBUT and phenol red thread test length and a 
lower tear meniscus height and area; this has had predictive 
power in people presenting for CL fitting. A formula linking 
symptoms (using the McMonnies Dry Eye Questionnaire), 
non-invasive tear break up time (NITFBUT), and tear me￾niscus height predicted potential intolerant subjects with a 
sensitivity of 100%, specificity of 57%, and accuracy of 78%. 
Intolerance was also associated with an increase in degraded 
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 85 85
lipid products, phospholipase A2, and lipocalin in tear sam￾ples.203 These studies suggest that features compatible with a 
dry eye state may predispose an individual to CL intolerance.
The variations in visual performance with soft CLs may be 
due to light scattering produced by changes in the hydration 
levels of the lens or changes in the tear film over the lens.204,205
Decreases in retinal image quality have been inferred from 
the modulation transfer function induced by the drying tear 
film and observed with the Schack-Hartman aberrometer.206
Contrast sensitivity in soft CL wearers is significantly re￾duced in the middle-to-high spatial frequencies, when the 
precorneal lens tear film dries and causing breakup. This 
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
Table 4
CORE
mechanisms
Systemic drugs
inhibit flow
Refractive Surgery
CL wear
Topical anesthesia
Activate
epithelial
MAPK +
NFK B +
Tear
Film
Instability
High
Evaporation
Low
Lacrimal
Flow
Goblet cell,
glycocalyx mucin loss
epithelial damage
- apoptosis
Inflammatory
lacrimal damage
SSDE; NSDE;
Lacrimal
obstruction
Environment
High Air Speed
Low Humidity
Blepharitis
Lid flora
lipases esterases
detergents
nerve
injury
Hyperosmolarity
Tear
Deficient or
unstable TF
lipid Layer
MGD Xerophthalmia
Ocular allergy
Preservatives
CL wear?
Low androgens
Aging
IL-1+
TNFA +
MMPs
– –
– Lacrimal
Gland
– –
–
– –
–
++
+
initial lacrimal stimulation
increased
reflex drive
nerve
stimulation
neurogenic
inflammation
neurosecretory
block
Reflex
block
Figure 2. Mechanisms of dry eye.
The core mechanisms of dry eye are driven by tear hyperosmolarity and tear film instability. The cycle of events is shown on the right of the 
figure. Tear hyperosmolarity causes damage to the surface epithelium by activating a cascade of inflammatory events at the ocular surface and 
a release of inflammatory mediators into the tears. Epithelial damage involves cell death by apoptosis, a loss of goblet cells, and disturbance 
of mucin expression, leading to tear film instability. This instability exacerbates ocular surface hyperosmolarity and completes the vicious 
circle. Tear film instability can be initiated, without the prior occurrence of tear hyperosmolarity, by several etiologies, including xerophthalmia, 
ocular allergy, topical preservative use, and contact lens wear. 
The epithelial injury caused by dry eye stimulates corneal nerve endings, leading to symptoms of discomfort, increased blinking and, potentially, 
compensatory reflex lacrimal tear secretion. Loss of normal mucins at the ocular surface contributes to symptoms by increasing frictional resistance 
between the lids and globe. During this period, the high reflex input has been suggested as the basis of a neurogenic inflammation within the gland.
The major causes of tear hyperosmolarity are reduced aqueous tear flow, resulting from lacrimal failure, and/or increased evaporation from the 
tear film. This is indicated by the arrow at the top-center of the figure. Increased evaporative loss is favored by environmental conditions of low 
humidity and high air flow and may be caused clinically, in particular, by meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD), which leads to an unstable tear 
film lipid layer. The quality of lid oil is modified by the action of esterases and lipases released by normal lid commensals, whose numbers are 
increased in blepharitis. Reduced aqueous tear flow is due to impaired delivery of lacrimal fluid into the conjunctival sac. It is unclear whether 
this is a feature of normal aging, but it may be induced by certain systemic drugs, such as antihistamines and anti-muscarinic agents. The most 
common cause is inflammatory lacrimal damage, which is seen in autoimmune disorders such as Sjogren syndrome and also in non-Sjogren 
syndrome dry eye (NSSDE). Inflammation causes both tissue destruction and a potentially reversible neurosecretory block. A receptor block 
may also be caused by circulating antibodies to the M3 receptor. Inflammation is favored by low tissue androgen levels. 
Tear delivery may be obstructed by cicatricial conjunctival scarring or reduced by a loss of sensory reflex drive to the lacrimal gland from the 
ocular surface. Eventually, the chronic surface damage of dry eye leads to a fall in corneal sensitivity and a reduction of reflex tear secretion. 
Various etiologies may cause dry eye acting, at least in part, by the mechanism of reflex secretory block, including: refractive surgery (LASIK 
dry eye), contact lens wear and the chronic abuse of topical anesthetics.
Individual etiologies often cause dry eye by several interacting mechanisms. Further details can be found in the text.
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 86 
could account for complaints of intermittent blurred vision 
in some CL wearers and may provide a stimulus to blink.207
3) Ocular Surface Disease
There is evidence that various forms of chronic ocular sur￾face disease result in destabilization of the tear film and add a 
dry eye component to the ocular surface disease. Allergic eye 
disease offers a well-studied example.208 Also, any form of dry 
eye, whatever its origins, may cause at least a loss of goblet 
cell numbers, so that an ocular surface element is added.209
4) Allergic Conjunctivitis
Allergic conjunctivitis takes several forms, which in￾clude seasonal allergic conjunctivitis, vernal keratoconjunc￾tivitis, and atopic keratoconjunctivitis. The general mecha￾nism leading to disease is that exposure to antigen leads to 
degranulation of IgE-primed mast cells, with the release of 
inflammatory cytokines. A Th2 response is activated at the 
ocular surface, initially in the conjunctival and, later, in the 
corneal epithelium, subsequently leading to submucosal 
changes. There is stimulation of goblet cell secretion and 
loss of surface membrane mucins.210 Surface epithelial cell 
death occurs, affecting conjunctival and corneal epithelium 
(punctate keratoconjunctivitis). Surface damage and the 
release of inflammatory mediators leads to allergic symp￾toms and to reflex stimulation of the normal lacrimal gland. 
Surface irregularities on the cornea (punctate epithelial 
keratitis and shield ulcer) and conjunctiva can lead to tear 
film instability and, hence, to a local drying component 
to the allergic eye disease. In chronic disease, there may 
be meibomian gland dysfunction, which could exacerbate 
surface drying by interfering with the tear film lipid layer. 
Lid swelling, eg, in vernal catarrh and atopic keratocon￾junctivitis, can interfere with lid apposition and tear film 
spreading, thus exacerbating the dry eye. 
Ocular allergy was noted to be a risk factor for dry eye in 
the Beaver Dam study, although the concomitant use of sys￾temic medications, such as antihistamines, was recognized 
as a potential contributor.122 Factors leading to a dry eye state 
in allergic eye disease are discussed by Fujishima et al.211
C. The Causative Mechanisms of Dry Eye
From the above discussion, it can be seen that certain 
core mechanisms are envisaged at the center of the dry eye 
process that can initiate, amplify, and potentially change the 
character of dry eye over time. These are tear hyperosmolar￾ity and tear film instability. This section is intended to show 
how the several subclasses of dry eye activate these core 
mechanisms and explain the features of various forms of 
dry eye. The interactions of various etiologies with these 
core mechanisms are summarized in Figure 2. 
It should be noted that an attractive mechanistic schema 
for dry eye has been presented in detail by Baudouin.212 In 
this concept, two levels of involvement are identified. The 
first level includes the known risk factors or causes of dry 
eye that ultimately lead to a series of secondary biological 
cascades, resulting in breakdown of the tear film and ocular 
surface. This pathbreaking conceptual approach describes 
the relationship of early disparate events to biological re￾sponses common to all forms of dry eye, many of which 
are mutually reinforcing. This leads to a vicious circle or 
loop. It is thought that early therapeutic intervention may 
disrupt this loop. The schema in Figure 2, developed from 
the discussion of our Subcommittee, emphasizes the core 
biological mechanisms described in this text.
1. Tear Hyperosmolarity
Tear hyperosmolarity is regarded as the central mecha￾nism causing ocular surface inflammation, damage, and 
symptoms, and the initiation of compensatory events in 
dry eye. Tear hyperosmolarity arises as a result of water 
evaporation from the exposed ocular surface, in situations 
of a low aqueous tear flow, or as a result of excessive evapo￾ration, or a combination of these events. Nichols et al have 
demonstrated the wide variation of tear film thinning rates 
in normal subjects, and it is reasonable to conclude that, for 
a given initial film thickness, subjects with the fastest thin￾ning rates would experience a greater tear film osmolarity 
than those with the slowest rates.114 Rapid thinning may be 
hypothesized as a risk factor for tear hyperosmolarity. 
Since the lacrimal fluid is secreted as a slightly hypoton￾ic fluid, it will always be expected that tear osmolarity will 
be higher in the tear film than in other tear compartments. 
There are also reasons to believe that osmolarity is higher 
in the tear film itself than in the neighboring menisci. One 
reason for this is that the ratio of area to volume (which 
determines the relative concentrating effect of evaporation) 
is higher in the film than the menisci.213
Hyperosmolarity stimulates a cascade of inflammatory 
events in the epithelial surface cells, involving MAP kinases 
and NFkB signalling pathways56 and the generation of 
inflammatory cytokines (IL-1A ; -1B ; TNF-A ) and MMPs 
(MMP9),58 which arise from or activate inflammatory cells 
at the ocular surface.214 These concepts are supported by 
studies of desiccating stress in the experimental model,215
which have demonstrated the evolution of inflammatory 
cytokine release and MMP activation.57 There is evidence 
that these inflammatory events lead to apoptotic death of 
surface epithelial cells, including goblet cells216; thus, goblet 
cell loss may be seen to be directly related to the effects of 
chronic inflammation.217,218 Goblet cell loss is a feature of 
every form of dry eye, and consistent with this is the dem￾onstration of reduced levels of the gel mucin MUC5AC in 
dry eye.219,220 With the evolution of dry eye, other factors 
are likely to amplify these initiating inflammatory events, 
and the contribution of direct autoimmune targeting of the 
ocular surface cannot be excluded. 
In the initial stages of dry eye, it is considered that ocular 
surface damage caused by osmotic, inflammatory or me￾chanical stresses (loss of surface lubrication) results in reflex 
stimulation of the lacrimal gland. Reflex trigeminal activity is 
thought to be responsible for an increased blink rate and a 
compensatory response, increased lacrimal secretion. In the 
case of lacrimal gland insufficiency (SSDE or NSSDE), the 
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 87
reflex secretory response will be insufficient to fully compen￾sate for the tear film hyperosmolarity, and in the steady state, 
this form of dry eye will be characterized by a hyperosmolar￾ity state with low tear volume and flow. In evaporative dry 
eye (eg, caused by MGD), it can be hypothesized that, since 
the lacrimal gland is initially healthy in this situation, lacrimal 
secretory compensation is at first able to compensate for tear 
film hyperosmolarity. Ultimately it would be expected that 
in the steady state, dry eye would be a condition of hyper￾osmolarity with a tear volume and flow greater than normal. 
This possibility of a high volume dry eye is supported by 
the increased tear secretion (based on the Schirmer I test) 
in patients with MGD compared to normals,221 although 
this evidence requires support by studies using more so￾phisticated tests of tear flow. In the study of Shimazaki et 
al, despite the increased tear flow, particularly in the gland 
dropout group, there was a shorter TFBUT and greater degree 
of dye staining in those with MGD than in those without. 
Excessive reflex stimulation of the lacrimal gland 
experimentally may induce a neurogenic inflammatory cy￾tokine response within the gland, leading to the sequence 
of glandular autoantigen expression, T-cell targeting, and 
the release of inflammatory mediators into the tears.20,222
It has also been considered to induce a state of ”lacrimal 
exhaustion” due to excessive reflex stimulation of the lac￾rimal gland.223,224 However, these provocative hypotheses 
await experimental support.
Knowledge is insufficient regarding the natural history 
of different forms of dry eye in relation to ocular surface 
sensitivity. Most reports,144,225,226 but not all,119 suggest that 
corneal sensitivity is impaired in chronic dry eye disease, 
suggesting that an initial period of increased reflex sensory 
activity is followed by a chronic period of reduced sensory 
input. This is likely to be the result of the longterm effects of 
inflammatory mediators on sensory nerve terminals supply￾ing the ocular surface, and there is evidence of morphologi￾cal changes in the sub-basal nerve plexus.227 At this stage 
of dry eye, the reflex sensory drive to lacrimal secretion 
becomes reduced, which would reverse any compensatory 
drive to lacrimal secretion that is postulated for the earlier 
phase of the disease. This would be expected to reduce 
the lacrimal secretory response, regardless of the etiology 
of the dry eye, and would therefore exacerbate both ADDE 
and EDE by reinforcing the low volume state in ADDE and 
converting a potentially high volume state in MGD-based 
EDE to a normal or low volume state due to an added lac￾rimal deficiency. The sensory drive to the blink reflex might 
be expected to be similarly affected, although there is no 
evidence to this effect and this area requires further study.
The above proposal may explain why a clear clinical 
separation between ADDE and EDE may at times be difficult 
to support on the basis of substantive tests. Thus, while there 
are studies that indicate, as expected, that tear evaporation 
rate is increased in MGD,62,63,82,83,221,228 or where there is an 
incomplete or absent tear film lipid layer229 in some groups 
of MGD, evaporation rate may be normal.221 Similarly, an 
increased evaporation rate has been reported by some authors 
in ADDE,59-63and a decreased rate by others.59 Again, whereas 
a reduction in tear flow is the hallmark of ADDE,63,83,124 a 
reduction in flow has also been reported with MGD.63,83
These findings appear contradictory, but may simply 
highlight our ignorance of the natural history of the pri￾mary disorders. Thus, there is evidence that spreading of 
the tear film lipid layer is retarded in severe ADDE, which 
has been attributed to the effect of the thinned aqueous 
phase of the tear film. Conversely, as noted earlier, it may 
be conceived that a loss of corneal sensitivity in EDE could 
reduce the reflex drive to tear secretion and, hence, result in 
a combined form of dry eye. These postulated interactions, 
occurring over time, may explain the overlap of findings in 
these two disorders and fit in to the general concept of a 
vicious circle in which widely varying influences combine 
to cause dry eye with a complex profile.
2. Tear Film Instability
In some forms of dry eye, tear film instability may be the 
initiating event, unrelated to prior tear hyperosmolarity. 
1) While frank tear film instability in the form of early tear 
film break up may readily be accepted as a component of dry 
eye, more subtle degrees of tear film instability may also pre￾dispose to dry eye complications in response to ocular surface 
stress. Thus, Goto et al reported that in a group of patients 
undergoing LASIK surgery and showing no features of dry eye 
by standard tests, those who showed tear film instability by 
the tear film analysis system (TMS) showed a greater decrease 
in tear film stability and more severe symptoms and dry eye 
signs, including punctate keratitis, postoperatively.10
2) Where the TFBUT is less than the blink interval, it is 
implied that tear film breakup in that individual is occurring 
normally in the waking state. (This state is expressed by the 
Ocular Protection Index, which is the ratio of the TFBUT divided 
by the blink interval.230 (See relevant template website [www.
tearfilm.org]). When this value is less than 1, then tear film 
breakup occurs in the waking, open-eye condition. If the TFBUT 
is greater than the blink interval but less than 10 seconds, then 
this TFBUT value is still currently regarded as an index of tear 
film instability. Where tear film instability represents tear film 
breakup occurring within the blink interval, it is assumed to give 
rise to local drying and hyperosmolarity of the exposed surface, 
to surface epithelial damage, and to a disturbance of glycocalyx 
and goblet cell mucins. The latter consequently exacerbates the 
tear film instability as part of a vicious circle of events.
Two examples of this clinical sequence, where tear film 
instability is due to a disturbance of ocular surface mucins, 
are xerophthalmia231 and allergic eye disease. 211 The initial 
loss of tear stability in vitamin A deficiency results from a re￾duced expression of mucins at the ocular surface and a loss of 
goblet cells.183,232 In seasonal allergic conjunctivitis or vernal 
keratoconjunctivitis, a disturbance of mucin expression at the 
surface of the eye is due, initially, to an IgE-mediated type I 
hypersensitivity mechanism, leading to the release of inflam￾matory mediators in response to allergen challenge.
Other examples include the actions of topical agents, in par￾ticular, preservatives such as BAC, which excite the expression of 
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 88 
inflammatory cell markers at the ocular surface, causing epithelial 
cell damage, cell death by apoptosis, and a decrease in goblet cell 
density.233 There is both clinical and experimental evidence to 
support such events.234-238 In a study of patients treated for glau￾coma for at least one year, flow cytometry demonstrated a greater 
expression of inflammatory markers (HLA-DR and ICAM-1) in 
those receiving preserved drops (BAC) than in normals or those 
receiving unpreserved drops. Use of preservative was associated 
with a lower expression of MUC5AC and the lowest MUC5AC 
levels were associated with the highest ICAM-1 and HLA-DR 
levels.239 This negative correlation suggested inflammation as a 
possible basis for the decreased mucin expression, in addition to 
any direct effect of BAC on goblet cells themselves. 
Considering the possible relationship between these find￾ings and dry eye, Pisella et al, in an unmasked study of 4107 
glaucoma patients, found that the frequency of ocular surface 
changes was twice as high in those receiving preserved drops 
than in those receiving unpreserved drops, and the frequency 
of signs and symptoms was dose-related.184
CL wear may also provide a route of entry into the dry eye 
mechanism, a route in addition to reduced corneal sensitivity. 
For a considerable time, CL wear has been recognized to cause 
changes to the ocular surface epithelia. Knop and Brewitt dem￾onstrated surface epithelial metaplasia and a reduced goblet 
cell density with hydrogel lens wear.240,241 Other studies have 
shown an increase in goblet cell density evolving over a period 
of 6 months in subjects wearing polymacon, galyfilcon, and 
silicone hydrogel lenses.242,243 In another study, no change in 
goblet cell density was found after 6 months wear of a daily 
disposable lens with a 2-week wearing schedule, and further 
studies suggest that the goblet cell responses may differ be￾tween hard and soft CLs.244
A recent study combining impression cytology with flow 
cytometry demonstrated an increase in inflammatory markers 
(HLA-DR and ICAM-1) at the ocular surface and a nonsig￾nificant trend toward a decrease in the expression of mucin 
markers (MUC5AC) in patients with a history of chronic CL 
wear.245 A later study has shown no difference between CL 
wearers and non-CL wearers in mucin expression (MUC5AC 
and the carbohydrate epitope H185, a marker for MUC 16) 
in tears or impression cytology samples.182 In summary, it ap￾pears that CL wear may activate proinflammatory markers and 
stimulate the ocular surface epithelia to a variable degree. It is 
not yet possible to say whether these changes alone predispose 
individuals to the occurrence of dry eye with CL wear.
D. The Basis for Symptoms in Dry Eye
The basis for symptoms in dry eye is not truly known 
but may be surmised from a consideration of the etiologies, 
mechanisms, and responses of dry eye to therapy.246 The oc￾currence of symptoms implies the activation of sensory nerves 
subserving nociception at the ocular surface.247,248 Candidates 
include tear and ocular surface hyperosmolarity – including 
tear film break-up in the interblink, shear-stress between the 
lids and globe in response to reduced tear volume, and/or the 
reduced expression of mucins at the ocular surface, the pres￾ence of inflammatory mediators at the surface of the eye, and, 
finally, hypersensitivity of the nociceptive sensory nerves.
Table 5. Dry eye severity grading scheme
Dry Eye Severity 
Level 1 2 34*
Discomfort, severity
& frequency
Mild and/or episodic; 
occurs under 
environmental stress
Moderate episodic or 
chronic, stress or no 
stress
Severe frequent or 
constant without 
stress
Severe and/or 
disabling and constant
Visual symptoms None or episodic mild 
fatigue
Annoying and/or 
activity-limiting 
episodic
Annoying, chronic 
and/or constant, 
limiting activity
Constant and/or 
possibly disabling
Conjunctival injection None to mild None to mild +/– +/++
Conjunctival staining None to mild Variable Moderate to marked Marked
Corneal staining
(severity/location) None to mild Variable Marked central Severe punctate 
erosions
Corneal/tear signs None to mild Mild debris, m meniscus
Filamentary keratitis, 
mucus clumping,
k
 tear debris
Filamentary keratitis, 
mucus clumping,
k
 tear debris, ulceration
Lid/meibomian glands MGD variably present MGD variably present Frequent Trichiasis, keratinization, 
symblepharon
TFBUT (sec) Variable a￾ 10 a￾ 5 Immediate
Schirmer score 
(mm/5 min) Variable a￾ 10 a￾ 5 a￾ 2
*Must have signs AND symptoms. TBUT: fluorescein tear break-up time. MGD: meibomian gland disease
Reprinted with permission from Behrens A, Doyle JJ, Stern L, et al. Dysfunctional tear syndrome. A Delphi approach to treatment recommendations. 
Cornea 2006;25:90-7
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 89
E. Classification of Dry Eye on the Basis of Severity
The Subcommittee considered that there was consider￾able clinical utility to adopting a classification of disease 
based on severity. The basic scheme of the Delphi Panel 
Report was adopted and modified to produce the third 
component of the recommendation (Table 5).
REFERENCES
 1. Lemp MA. Report of the National Eye Institute/Industry Workshop on 
Clinical Trials in Dry Eye. CLAO J 1995;21:221-32
 2. Begley CG, Chalmers RL, Abetz L, et al. The relationship between habitual 
patient-reported symptoms and clinical signs among patients with dry eye 
of varying severity. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:4753-61
 3. Adatia FA, Michaeli-Cohen A, Naor J, et al. Correlation between corneal 
sensitivity, subjective dry eye symptoms and corneal staining in Sjogren’s 
syndrome. Can J Ophthalmol 2004;39:767-71
 4. Vitale S, Goodman LA, Reed GF, Smith JA. Comparison of the NEI-VFQ 
and OSDI questionnaires in patients with Sjogren’s syndrome-related dry 
eye. Health Qual Outcomes 20041;2:44
 5. Rieger G. The importance of the precorneal tear film for the quality of 
optical imaging. Br J Ophthalmol 1992;76:157-8
 6. Liu Z, Pflugfelder SC. Corneal surface irregularity and the effect of artificial 
tears in aqueous tear deficiency. Ophthalmology 1999;106:936-43
 7. Goto E, Yagi Y, Matsumoto Y, Tsubota K. Impaired functional visual acuity 
of dry eye patients. Am J Ophthalmol 2002;133:181-6
 8. Holly F, Lemp MA. Formation and rupture of the tear film. Exp Eye Res
1973;15:515-25
 9. Bron AJ. Diagnosis of dry eye. Surv Ophthalmol 2001;45 Suppl 2:S221-6
 10. Goto T, Zheng X, Klyce SD, et al. A new method for tear film stability 
using videokeratography. Am J Ophthalmol 2003;135:607-12
 11. Farris RL, Stuchell RN, Mandel ID Tear osmolarity variation in the dry 
eye. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 1986;84:250-68
 12. Gilbard JP. Human tear film electrolyte concentrations in health and dry￾eye disease. Int Ophthalmol Clin 1994 Winter;34:27-36
 13. Murube J. Tear osmolarity. Ocul Surf 2006;1;62-73
 14. Tomlinson A, Khanal S, Ramaesh K, et al. Tear film osmolarity: determination 
of a referent for dry eye diagnosis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:4309-15
 15. Pflugfelder SC, Jones D, Ji Z, et al. Altered cytokine balance in the tear fluid 
and conjunctiva of patients with Sjogren’s syndrome keratoconjunctivitis 
sicca. Curr Eye Res 1999;19:201-11
 16. Tsubota K, Fujihara T, Saito K, Takeuchi T. Conjunctival epithelium ex￾pression of HLA-DR in dry eye patients. Ophthalmologica 1999;213:16-9
 17. Stern ME, Beuerman RW, Fox RI, et al. The pathology of dry eye; the interac￾tion between the ocular surface and lacrimal glands. Cornea 1998;17:584-9
 18. Pflugfelder SC, Solomon A, Stern ME. The diagnosis and management of 
dry eye:a twenty-five year review. Cornea 2000;19:644-9
 19. Beuerman RW, Mircheff A, Pflugfelder SC, Stern ME. The lacrimal func￾tional unit, in Pflugfelder SC, Beuerman RW, Stern ME (eds). Dry eye and 
ocular surface disorders. New York, Marcel Dekker, 2004
 20. Stern ME, Gao J, Siemarko KF, et al. The role of the lacrimal functional 
unit in the pathophysiology of dry eye. Exp Eye Res 2004;78:409-6
 21. (No authors listed). Research in dry eye: Report of the Research Subcom￾mittee of the 2007 Dry Eye WorkShop (DEWS). Ocul Surf 2007;5:179-193
 22. Jordan A, Baum J. Basic tear flow. Does it exist? Ophthalmology 1980;87:920.
 23. Gupta A, Heigle T, Pflugfelder SC. Nasolacrimal stimulation of aqueous 
tear production. Cornea 1997;16:645-8
24. Vitali C. Classification criteria for Sjogren’s syndrome. Ann Rheum Dis
2003;62:94-5
 25. Murube J, Benitez del Castillo JM, Chenghou L, et al. The Madrid triple 
classification system. Arch Soc Esp Oftalmol 2003;78;587-93
 26. Murube J, Nemeth J, Hoh H, et al. The triple classification of dry eye for 
practical clinical use. Eur J Ophthalmol 2005;15:660-7
 27. Behrens A, Doyle JJ, Stern L, et al. Dysfunctional tear syndrome: A Delphi 
approach to treatment recommendations. Cornea 2006;25:900-7
 28. Doughty MJ, Naase T. Further analysis of the human spontaneous eye blink 
rate by a cluster analysis-based approach to categorize individuals with 
‘normal’ versus ‘frequent’ eye blink activity. Eye Contact Lens 2006;32:294-9 
 29. Nakamori K, Odawara M, Nakajima T, et al. Blinking is controlled primar￾ily by ocular surface conditions. Am J Ophthalmol 1997;124:24-30
 30. Mangubat L, Luague S. Normal measurements of the palpebral fissure and the 
interpalpebral distance among Filipinos. Philipp J Surg Surg Spec 1966;21:304-6
 31. Stoller SH, Meyer DR. Quantitating the change in upper lid position during 
downgaze. Ophthalmology 1994;101:1604-7
 32. Cho P, Sheng C, Chan C, et al. Baseline blink rates and the effect of visual 
task difficulty and position of gaze. Curr Eye Res 2000;20: 64-70
 33. Sullivan DA. Sex and sex steroid influences on the dry eye syndrome, in 
Pflugfelder SC, Beuerman RW, Stern ME (eds). Dry eye and ocular surface 
disorders. New York, Marcel Dekker, 2004
 34. Sullivan DA. Androgen deficiency and dry eye syndromes. Arch Soc 
Espanola Oftalmologia 2004;79:49-50
 35. Sullivan DA. Tearful relationships? Sex, hormones and aqueous-deficient 
dry eye. Ocul Surf 2004;2:92-123
 36. Worda C, Nepp J, Huber JC, Sator MO. Treatment of keratoconjunctivitis 
sicca with topical androgen. Maturitas 2001;37, 209-12
 37. Zeligs MA. Dehydroepiandrosterone therapy for the treatment of dry eye 
disorders. Int Patent Application. WO 94/04155, 1994
 38. Schiffman RM, Bradford R, Bunnell B, et al. A multi-center, double-masked, 
randomized, vehicle-controlled, parallel group study to evaluate the safety 
and efficacy of testosterone ophthalmic solution in patients with meibo￾mian gland dysfunction. ARVO e-abstract #5608, 2006 (www.arvo.org)
 39. Krenzer KL, Dana MR, Ullman MD, et al. Effect of androgen deficiency 
on the human meibomian gland and ocular surface. J Clin Endocr Metab
2000;85:4874-82
 40. Sullivan BD, Evans JE, Krenzer KL, et al. Impact of antiandrogen treat￾ment on the fatty acid profile of neutral lipids in human meibomian gland 
secretions. J Clin Endocr Metab 2000;85:4866-73
 41. Sullivan BD, Evans JE, Cermak JM, et al. Complete androgen insensitivity 
syndrome: Effect on human meibomian gland secretions. Arch Ophthalmol 
2002;120:1689-99
 42. Cermak JM, Krenzer KL, Sullivan RM, et al. Is complete androgen insen￾sitivity syndrome associated with alterations in the meibomian gland and 
ocular surface? Cornea 2003;22:516-21
 43. Mantelli F, Moretti C, Micera A, Bonini S. Conjunctival mucin deficiency 
in complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS). Graefes Arch Clin
Exp Ophthalmol 2006 Nov 2; [Epub ahead of print]
 44. Tamer C, Oksuz H, Sogut S. Androgen status of the nonautoimmune dry 
eye subtypes. Ophthalmic Res 2006;38:280-6
45. (No authors listed). Epidemiology of dry eye: Report of the Epidemiol￾ogy Subcommittee of the 2007 Dry Eye WorkShop (DEWS). Ocul Surf
2007;5:93-107
 46. Schaumberg DA, Buring JE, Sullivan DA, Dana MR. Hormone replacement 
therapy and dry eye syndrome. JAMA 2001;286:2114-9
 47. Schaumberg DA, Sullivan DA, Buring JE, Dana MR. Prevalence of dry eye 
syndrome among US women. Am J Ophthalmol 2003;136:318-26
 48. Smith JA, Vitale S, Reed GF, et al. Dry eye signs and symptoms in women 
with premature ovarian failure. Arch Ophthalmol 2004;122:151-6
 49. Mathers WD, Lane JA, Zimmerman MB. Tear film changes associated with 
normal aging. Cornea 1996;15: 229-34
 50. Patel S, Farrell JC. Age-related changes in precorneal tear film stability. 
Optom Vis Sci 1989;66:175-8
 51. Sullivan BD, Evans JE, Dana MR, Sullivan DA. Influence of aging on the 
polar and neutral lipid profiles in human meibomian gland secretions. 
Arch Ophthalmol 2006;124: 286-92
 52. Paschides CA, Stefaniotou M, Papageorgiou J, et al. Ocular surface and 
environmental changes. Acta Ophthalmol Scand 1998;876:74-7
 53. Tsubota K, Nakamori K. Dry eyes and video display terminals N Engl J 
Med 1993;328:584
 54. Mishima S, Gasset A, Klyce S, Baum J. Determination of tear volume and 
tear flow. Investigative Ophthalmology 1966; 5: 264-76
 55. Scherz W, Dohlman CH. Is the lacrimal gland dispensable? Keratoconjunc￾tivitis sicca after lacrimal gland removal. Arch Ophthalmol 1975;93: 81-3
 56. Li DQ, Chen Z, Song XJ, et al. Stimulation of matrix metalloproteinases 
by hyperosmolarity via a JNK pathway in human corneal epithelial cells. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45:4302-11
 57. Luo L, Li DQ, Corrales RM, Pflugfelder SC. Hyperosmolar saline is a proinflam￾matory stress on the mouse ocular surface. Eye Contact Lens 2005;31:186-93
 58. De Paiva CS, Corrales RM, Villarreal AL, et al. Corticosteroid and doxycycline 
suppress MMP-9 and inflammatory cytokine expression, MAPK activation in 
the corneal epithelium in experimental dry eye. Exp Eye Res 2006;83:526-35
 59. Tsubota K, Yamada M. Tear evaporation from the ocular surface. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1992;33:2942-50
 60. Rolando M, Refojo MF, Kenyon KR. Increased tear evaporation in eyes 
with keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Arch Ophthalmol 1983;101:557-8
 61. Rolando M, Refojo MF, Kenyon KR. Tear water evaporation and eye surface 
diseases. Ophthalmologica 1985;190:147-9
 62. Mathers WD. Ocular evaporation in meibomian gland dysfunction and 
dry eye. Ophthalmology 1993;100:347-51
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 90 
 63. Mathers WD, Lane JA, Sutphin JE, Zimmerman MB. Model for ocular 
tear film function. Cornea 1996;15:110-9
 64. Mathers WD, Daley TE. Tear flow and evaporation in patients with and 
without dry eye. Ophthalmology 1996;103:664-9
 65. Yokoi N, Mossa F, Tiffany JM, Bron A J. Assessment of meibomian gland 
function in dry eye using meibometry. Arch Ophthalmol 1999;117:723-9
 66. Yokoi N, Takehisa Y, Kinoshita S. Correlation of tear lipid layer interfer￾ence patterns with the diagnosis and severity of dry eye. Am J Ophthalmol
1996;122:818-24
 67. Owens H, Phillips JR. Tear spreading rates: post-blink. Adv Exp Med Biol 
2002;506(Pt B):1201-4
 68. Goto E, Tseng SC. Differentiation of lipid tear deficiency dry eye by kinetic 
analysis of tear interference images. Arch Ophthalmol 2003;121:173-80
 69. Nakamura H, Kawakamu A, Eguchi K. Mechanisms of autoantibody 
production and the relationship between autoantibodies and the clinical 
manifestations in Sjogren’s syndrome. Trans Res 2006;148(6):281-8
 70. Hayashi Y, Arakaki R, Ishimaru N. The role of caspase cascade on the 
development of primary Sjogren’s syndrome. J Med Invest 2003;50:32-8
 71. Zoukhri D. Effect of inflammation on lacrimal gland function. Exp Eye 
Res 2006;82:885-98. [Epub 2005 Nov 23]
 72. Dawson L, Tobin A, Smith P, Gordon T. Antimuscarinic antibodies in 
Sjogren’s syndrome: where are we, and where are we going? Arthritis 
Rheum 2005;52:2984-95
 73. Dawson LJ, Stanbury J, Venn N, et al. Antimuscarinic antibodies in primary 
Sjogren’s syndrome reversibly inhibit the mechanism of fluid secretion by hu￾man submandibular salivary acinar cells. Arthritis Rheum 2006;54:1165-73
 74. Vitali C, Bombardieri S, Jonsson R, et al. Classification criteria for Sjogren’s 
syndrome: a revised version of the European criteria proposed by the 
American-European Consensus Group. Ann Rheum Dis 2002;61:554-8
 75. Vitali C, Bombardieri S, Moutsopoulos HM, et al. Preliminary criteria for the 
classification of Sjogren’s syndrome. Results of a prospective concerted ac￾tion supported by the European Community. Arthritis Rheum 1993;36:340-7
 76. Fox RI, Robinson CA, Curd JG, et al. Sjogren’s syndrome. Proposed criteria 
for classification. Arthritis Rheum 1986;29:477-585
 77. Wiik A, Cervera R, Haass M, et al. European attempts to set guidelines for improv￾ing diagnostics of autoimmune rheumatic disorders. Lupus 2006;15:391-6
 78. Moutsopoulos HM, Manoussakis MN. Immunopathogenesis of Sjogren 
syndrome, “facts and fancy.” Autoimmunity 1989;5:17-24
 79. Sullivan DA, Belanger A, Cermak JM, et al. Are women with Sjogren’s 
syndrome androgen deficient? J Rheumatology 2003;30:2413-9
 80. Cermak JM, Papas AS, Sullivan RM, et al: Nutrient intake in women with 
primary and secondary Sjogren’s syndrome. Eur J Clin Nutr 2003; 57:328-34
 81. Jones DT, Monroy D, Ji Z, et al. Sjogren’s syndrome: cytokine and Epstein￾Barr viral gene expression within the conjunctival epithelium. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1994;35:3493-504
 82. Shimazaki J, Goto E, Ono M, et al. Meibomian gland dysfunction in 
patients with Sjogren syndrome. Ophthalmology 1998;105:1485-8
 83. Tomlinson A, Khanal S. Assessment of tear film dynamics: quantification 
approach. Ocul Surf 2005;3:81-95
 84. Craig JP, Tomlinson A. Age and gender effects on the normal tear film. 
Adv Exp Med Biol 1998; 438:411-5.
85. Sahlin S, Chen E. Evaluation of the lacrimal drainage function by the drop 
test. Am J Ophthalmol 1996;122:701-8
 86. Rolando M, Refojo MF. Tear evaporimeter for measuring water evaporation 
rate from the tear film under controlleded conditions in humans. Exp Eye 
Res 1983;36:25-33
 87. Tomlinson A, Geisbrecht J. The aging tear film. Br J Contact Lens Assoc
1993;16;67-9
 88. Norn MS. Semiquantitative interference study of the fatty layer of the 
pre-corneal film. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh) 1979;57:766-74
 89. Damato BE, Allan D, Murray SB, Lee WR. Senile atrophy of the human 
lacrimal gland: the contribution of chronic inflammatory disease. Br J 
Ophthalmol 1984;68:674-80
 89a. Obata H, Yamamoto S, Horiuchi H, Machinami R. Histopathologic study 
of human lacrimal gland. Statistical analysis with special reference to ag￾ing. Ophthalmology 1995;102:678-86
 90. Davidoff E, Friedman AH. Congenital alacrima. Surv Ophthalmol
1977;22:113-9
 91. Arya SK, Chaudhuri Z, Jain R, et al. Congenital alacrima in Pierre Robin 
sequence. Cornea. 2004; 23:632-4
 92. Brooks BP, Kleta R, Stuart C, et al. Genotypic heterogeneity and clinical 
phenotype in triple A syndrome: a review of the NIH experience 2000-
2005. Clin Genet 2005;68:215-21
 93. Krumbholz M, Koehler K, Huebner A. Cellular localization of 17 natural 
mutant variants of ALADIN protein in triple A syndrome—shedding light 
on an unexpected splice mutation. Biochem Cell Biol 2006;84:243-9
 94. Axelrod FB, Chelimsky GG, Weese-Mayer DE. Pediatric autonomic 
disorders. Pediatrics 2006;118: 309-21
 95. Gold-von Simson G, Axelrod FB. Familial dysautonomia: update and 
recent advances. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care 2006;36:218-37 
 96. James DG, Anderson R, Langley D, Ainslie D. Ocular sarcoidosis. Br J 
Ophthalmol 1964;48:461-70
 97. Heath P. Ocular lymphomas. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc 1948;46:385-98
 98. Itescu S, Brancato LJ, Buxbaum J, et al. A diffuse infiltrative CD8 lymphocy￾tosis syndrome in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection: a host 
immune response associated with HLA-DR5. Ann Intern Med1990;112:3-10
 99. Ogawa Y, Okamoto S, Wakui M, et al. Dry eye after haematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation. Br J Ophthalmol 1999;83:1125-30 
 100. Ogawa Y, Kuwana M, Yamazaki K, et al. Periductal area as the primary site 
for T-cell activation in lacrimal gland chronic graft- versus-host disease. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:1888-96 
 101. Maitchouk DY, Beuerman RW, Ohta T, et al. Tear production after unilateral 
removal of the main lacrimal gland in squirrel monkeys. Arch Ophthalmol
2000;118:246-52
 102. Whitwell J. Denervation of the lacrimal gland. Br J Ophthalmol 1958;42:518-25
 103. Maitchouk DY, Beuerman RW, Ohta T, et al. Tear production after unilateral 
removal of the main lacrimal gland in squirrel monkeys. Arch Ophthalmol
2000;118:246-52
 103. Nguyen DH, Vadlamudi V, Toshida H, Beuerman RW. Loss of parasym￾pathetic innervation leads to sustained expression of pro-inflammatory 
genes in the rat lacrimal gland. Auton Neurosci 2006;124:81-9
 104. Seifert P, Stuppi S, Spitznas M. Distribution pattern of nervous tissue and pepti￾dergic nerve fibers in accessory lacrimal glands. Curr Eye Res 1997;16: 298-302
 105. Guzey M, Ozardali I, Basar E, et al. A survey of trachoma: the histopa￾thology and the mechanism of progressive cicatrization of eyelid tissues. 
Ophthalmologica 2000;214: 277-84
 106. Dart J. Cicatricial pemphigoid and dry eye. Semin Ophthalmol 2005;20: 95-100
107. Eschle-Meniconi ME, Ahmad SR, Foster CS. Mucous membrane pem￾phigoid: an update. Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2005;16:303-7
 108. Hingorani M, Lightman S. Ocular cicatricial pemphigoid. Curr Opin Allergy
Clin Immunol 2006;6: 373-8
 109. Power WJ, Ghoraishi M, Merayo-Lloves J, et al. Analysis of the acute ophthalmic 
manifestations of the erythema multiforme/Stevens-Johnson syndrome/tox￾ic epidermal necrolysis disease spectrum. Ophthalmology 1995;102:1669-76
 110. Lemp MA. Basic principles and classification of dry eye disorders, in Lemp 
MA, Marquandt R (eds). The dry eye: a comprehensive guide. New York, 
Springer,1992,pp 101-31
 111. Battat L, Macri A, Dursun D, Pflugfelder SC. Effects of laser in situ 
keratomileusis on tear production, clearance, and the ocular surface. 
Ophthalmology 2001;108:1230-5.
 112. Nguyen DH, Beuerman RW, Toshida H. The effects of sensory and parasym￾pathetic denervation on the kinases and initiation factors controlling pro￾tein synthesis in the lacrimal gland. Adv Exp Med Biol 2002;506(PtA):65-70
 113. Gilbard JP, Gray KL, Rossi SR. A proposed mechanism for increased tear-film 
osmolarity in contact lens wearers. Am J Ophthalmology 1986;102:505-7
 114. Nichols JJ, Sinnott LT. Tear film, contact lens, and patient-related factors 
associated with contact lens-related dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
2006;47:1319-28 
 115. Gilbard JP, Rossi SR. Tear film and ocular surface changes in a rabbit model 
of neurotrophic keratitis. Ophthalmology 1990;97:308-12
 116. Albietz JM, Lenton LM, McLennan SG. Chronic dry eye and regression after 
laser in situ keratomileusis for myopia. J Cataract Refract Surg 2004;30:675-84
 117. Albietz JM, Lenton LM, McLennan SG. Dry eye after LASIK: comparison of 
outcomes for Asian and Caucasian eyes. Clin Exp Optom 2005;88:89-96
 118. Wilson SE, Ambrosio R Jr. Laser in-situ keratomileusis-induced neuro￾tophic epitheliopathy. Am J Ophthalmol 2001;132:405
 119. De Paiva CS, Pflugfelder SC. Corneal epitheliopathy of dry eye induces hyper￾esthesia to mechanical air jet stimulation. Am J Ophthalmol 2004;137: 109-15
 120. Seifart U, Strempel I. The dry eye and diabetes mellitus. Ophthalmologe
1994;91:235-9
 121. Moss SE, Klein R, Klein BE. Prevalence of and risk factors for dry eye syn￾drome. Arch Ophthalmol 2000;118:1264-8
 122. Moss SE, Klein R, Klein BE. Incidence of dry eye in an older population. 
Arch Ophthalmol 2004; 122: 369-73
 123. Kaiserman I, Kaiserman N, Nakar S, Vinker S. Dry eye in diabetic patients. 
Am J Ophthalmol 2005;139: 498-503
 124. Goebbels M. Tear secretion and tear film function in insulin dependent 
diabetics. Br J Ophthalmol 2000;84:19-21
 125. Cavanagh HD, Colley AM. The molecular basis of neurotrophic keratitis. 
Acta Ophthalmol Suppl 1989;192:115-34
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 91
 126. Heigle TJ, Pflugfelder SC. Aqueous tear production in patients with 
neurotrophic keratitis. Cornea 1996;15:135-8
 127. Nishida T, Nakamura M, Konma T, et al. [Neurotrophic keratopathy--
studies on substance P and the clinical significance of corneal sensation]. 
Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi 1997;101: 948-74
 128. Lambiase A, Rama P, Bonini S, et al. Topical treatment with nerve growth 
factor for corneal neurotrophic ulcers. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1174-80
 129. Bonini S, Rama P, Olzi D, Lambiase A. Neurotrophic keratitis. Eye
2003;17:989-95
 130. Yamada N, Yanai R, Inui M, Nishida T. Sensitizing effect of substance P on 
corneal epithelial migration induced by IGF-1, fibronectin, or interleukin-
6. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:833-9
 131. Yamada N, Yanai R, Kawamoto K, et al. Promotion of corneal epithelial 
wound healing by a tetrapeptide (SSSR) derived from IGF-1. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:3286-92
 132. Baum JL, Adler ME. Pheochromocytoma, medullary thyroid carcinoma, 
multiple mucosal neuroma. A variant of the syndrome. Arch Ophthalmol
1972;87: 74-84
 133. Schein OD, Hochberg MC, Munoz B, et al. Dry eye and dry mouth in the 
elderly: a population-based assessment. Arch Int Med 1999;159: 1359-63
 134. Foulks G, Bron AJ. A clinical description of meibomian gland dysfunction. 
Ocul Surf 2003:107-26
 135. Bron AJ, Tiffany JM. The contribution of Meibomian disease to dry eye. 
Cornea 2004;2:149-64
 136. Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Gouveia SM, et al. Functional aspects of the tear film 
lipid layer. Exp Eye Res 2004;78 347-60
137. Bron AJ, Mengher LS. Congenital deficiency of meibomian glands. Br J 
Ophthalmol 1987;71:312-4
 138. Kriederman BM, Myloyde TL, Witte MH, et al. FOXC2 haploinsufficient 
mice are a model for human autosomal dominant lymphedema-distichiasis 
syndrome. Hum Mol Genet 2003;12:1179-85
 139. Gifford SR. The etiology of chronic meibomitis. Am J Ophthalmol 1921;4: 566-70
 140. Brooks BP, Dagenais SI, Nelson CC, et al. Mutation of the FOXC2 gene 
in familial distichiasis. J AAPOS 2003;7:354-7
 141. Cowper HW. Meibomian seborrhoea. Am J Ophthalmol 1922;5:25-30
 142. Mathers WD, Shields WJ, Sachdev MS, et al. Meibomian gland morphology 
and tear osmolarity changes with Acutane therapy. Cornea 1991;10:286-90
 143. Bron AJ, Benjamin L, Snibson GR. Meibomian gland disease. Classification 
and grading of lid changes. Eye 1991;5:395-411
 144. Pflugfelder SC,Tseng, SC, Sanabria O, et al. Evaluation of subjective as￾sessments and objective diagnostic tests for diagnosing tear-film disorders 
known to cause ocular irritation. Cornea 1998;17:38-56
 145. McCulley JP, Dougherty JM. Blepharitis associated with acne rosacea and 
seborrheic dermatitis. Int Ophthalmol Clin 1985;25:159-72
 146. McCulley JP: Meibomitis, in Kaufman HE, Barron BA, McDonald MB, 
et al (eds). The cornea. New York, London and Edinburgh, Churchill 
Livingstone, 1988, pp125-37
 147. Baum JL, Bull MJ. Ocular manifestations of the ectrodactyly, ectodermal 
dysplasia, cleft lip-palate syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol 1974;78:211-6
148. Mondino BJ, Bath PE, Foos RY, et al. Ocular manifestations of the ectro￾dactyly, ectodermal dysplasia, cleft lip-palate syndrome. Am J Ophthalmol
1984;97:496-500
 149. Lambert R, Smith RE. Hyperkeratinization in a rabbit model of meibomian 
gland dysfunction. Am J Ophthalmol 1988;105:703-5
 150. Lambert RW, Smith RE. Effects of 13-cis-retinoic acid on the hamster 
meibomian gland. J Invest Dermatol 1989;92:321-5
 151. Ikui H, Sugi K, Uga S. Ocular signs of chronic chlorobiphenyl poisoning 
(Yusho). Fukuoka Igaku Zasshi. Fukuoka Acta Medica 1969;60:432
 152. Ohnishi Y, Ikui S, Kurimoto S, Kawashima K. Further ophthalmic studies 
of patients with chronic chlorobiphenyls poisoning. Fukuoka Igaku Zasshi. 
Fukuoka Acta Medica 1975;66:640
 153. Ohnishi Y, Kohno T. Polychlorinated biphenyls poisoning in monkey eye. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1979;18:981-4
 154. Jester JV, Nicolaides N, Kiss-Palvolgyi I, Smith RE. Meibomian gland 
dysfunction. II. The role of keratinization in a rabbit model of MGD. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1989b;30:936-45
 155. Fu YA. Ocular manifestation of polychlorinated biphenyls intoxication. 
Am J Ind Med 1984;5:127-32
 156. Robin JB, Jester JV, Nobe J, et al. In vivo transillumination biomicroscopy 
and photography of meibomian gland dysfunction. A clinical study. Oph￾thalmology 1985;92:1423-6
 157. Mathers W, Shields W, Sachdev M, et al. Meibomian gland dysfunction 
in chronic blepharitis. Cornea 1991;10: 277-85
 158. Chew CKS, Hykin PG, Jansweijer C, et al. The casual level of meibomian 
lipids in humans. Curr Eye Res 1993;12:255-9
 159. Shine WE, McCulley JP. The role of cholesterol in chronic blepharitis. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1991;32: 2272-80
 160. Shine WE, Silvany R, McCulley JP. Relation of cholesterol-stimulated 
Staphylococcus aureus growth to chronic blepharitis. Invest Ophthalmol 
Vis Sci 1993;34:2291-6
 161. Dougherty JM, McCulley JP. Bacterial lipases and chronic blepharitis. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1986;27:486-91
 162. Gilbard JP, Farris RL. Ocular surface drying and tear film osmolarity in 
thyroid eye disease. Acta Ophthalmol 1983;61:108-16
 163. Tsubota K, Nakamori K. Effects of ocular surface area and blink rate on 
tear dynamics. Arch Ophthalmol 1995;113:155-8
 164. Lemp MA. Surfacing abnormalities in the preocular tear film and dry eye 
syndromes. Int Ophthalmol Clin 1973;13:191-9
 165. Rees TD, Jelks GW. Blepharoplasty and the dry eye syndrome: guidelines 
for surgery? Plast Reconstr. Surg 1981;68:249-52
 166. Abelson MB, Ousler GW III, Nally LA, et al. Alternative reference values 
for tear film break up time in normal and dry eye populations. Adv Exp 
Med Biol 2002;506(Pt B):121-5
 167. Nakamori K, Odawara M, Nakajima T, et al. Blinking is controlled primar￾ily by ocular surface conditions. Am J Ophthalmol 1997;124:24-30 
 168. Lawrence MS, Redmond DE Jr, Elsworth JD, et al. The D1 receptor 
antagonist, SCH23390, induces signs of Parkinsonism in African green 
monkeys. Life Sci 1991;49:PL229-34
 169. Karson CN, Burns RS, LeWitt PA, et al. Blink rates and disorders of move￾ment. Neurology 1984;34:677-8
170. Biousse V, Skibell BC, Watts RL, et al. Ophthalmologic features of 
Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 2004;62:177-80
 171. Kwon OY, Kim SH, Kim JH, et al. Schirmer test in Parkinson’s disease. J 
Korean Med Sci 1994;9:239-42
 172. Bagheri H, Berlan M, Senard JM, et al. Lacrimation in Parkinson’s disease. 
Clin Neuropharmacol 1994;17:89-91.
 173. Tamer C, Melek IM, Duman T, Oksuz H. Tear film tests in Parkinson’s 
disease patients. Ophthalmology 2005;112:1795
 174. Driver PJ, Lemp MA. Meibomian gland dysfunction. Surv Ophthalmol 
1996;40: 43-67
 175. Sullivan DA, Krenzer KL, Sullivan BD, et al. Does androgen insufficiency 
cause lacrimal gland inflammation and aqueous tear deficiency? Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1999;40:1261-5
 176. Sullivan DA, Wickham LA, Rocha EM, et al. Androgens and dry eye in 
Sjogren’s syndrome. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1999;876:312-24
 177. Sullivan DA, Sullivan BD, Evans JE, et al. Androgen deficiency, Meibomian 
gland dysfunction, and evaporative dry eye. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2002;966:211-22
 178. Sullivan DA, Schaumberg DA, Suzuki T, et al. Sex steroids, meibomian gland 
dysfunction and evaporative dry eye in Sjogren’s syndrome. Lupus 2002;11:667
 179. Okun MS, Walter BL, McDonald WM, et al. Beneficial effects of testoster￾one replacement for the nonmotor symptoms of Parkinson disease. Arch 
Neurol 2002;59:1750-3
 180. Magalhaes M, Wenning GK, Daniel SE, Quinn NP. Autonomic dysfunc￾tion in pathologically confirmed multiple system atrophy and idiopathic 
Parkinson’s disease—a retrospective comparison. Acta Neurol Scand
1995;91:98-102
 181. Tei M, Spurr-Michaud SJ, Tisdale AS, Gipson IK. Vitamin A deficiency 
alters the expression of mucin genes by the rat ocular surface epithelium. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:82-8
 182. Hori Y, Spurr-Michaud S, Russo CL, et al. Differential regulation of mem￾brane-associated mucins in the human ocular surface epithelium. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45:114-22
 183. Sommer A, Emran N. Tear production in a vitamin A responsive xeroph￾thalmia. Am J Ophthalmol 1982;93:84-7
 184. Pisella PJ, Pouliquen P, Baudouin C. Prevalence of ocular symptoms and 
signs with preserved and preservative free glaucoma medication. Br J 
Ophthalmol 2002;86:418-23
 185. Pharmakakis NM, Katsimpris JM, Melachrinou MP, Koliopoulos JX. Cor￾neal complications following abuse of topical anesthetics. Eur J Ophthalmol
2002;12:373-8
 186. Chen HT, Chen KH, Hsu WM. Toxic keratopathy associated with abuse 
of low-dose anesthetic: a case report. Cornea 2004;23:527-9
 187. McMahon TT, Zadnik K. Twenty-five years of contact lenses: the impact 
on the cornea and ophthalmic practice. Cornea 2000;19:730-40
 188. Schlanger JL. A study of contact lens failures. J Am Optom Assoc 1993;64:220–4
 189. Pritchard N, Fonn D. Dehydration, lens movement and dryness ratings 
of hydrogel contact lenses. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 1995;15:281-6
 190. (No authors cited). Methodologies to diagnose and monitor dry eye. 
Report of the Diagnostic Subcommittee of the International Dry Eye 
WorkShop (2007). Ocul Surf 2007;5:108-152
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
THE OCULAR SURFACE / APRIL 2007, VOL. 5, NO. 2 / www.theocularsurface.com 92 
 191. Doughty MJ, Fonn D, Richter D, et al. A patient questionnaire approach 
to estimating the prevalence of dry eye symptoms in patients presenting 
to optometric practices across Canada. Optom Vis Sci 1997;74:624–31 
 192. Nichols JJ, Mitchell GL, Nichols KK, et al. The performance of the Contact 
Lens Dry Eye Questionnaire as a screening survey for contact lens-related 
dry eye. Cornea 2002;21:469–75
 193. Begley CG, Caffery B, Nichols KK, Chalmers R. Responses of contact lens 
wearers to a dry eye survey. Optom Vis Sci 2000;77:40-6 
 194. Begley CG, Chalmers RL, Mitchell GL, et al. Characterization of ocular surface 
symptoms from optometric practices in North America. Cornea 2001;20:610-8 
 195. Nichols JJ, Ziegler C, Mitchell GL, Nichols KK. Self-reported dry eye dis￾ease across refractive modalities. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:1911–4 
 196. Thai LC, Tomlinson A, Doane MG. Effect of refractive contact lens materi￾als on tear physiology. Optom Vis Sci 2004;81:194-204
 197. Efron N, Brennan NA. A survey of wearers of low water content hydrogel 
contact lenses. Clin Exp Optom 1988;71:86–90
 198. Fonn D, Situ P, Simpson T. Hydrogel lens dehydration and subjective 
comfort and dryness ratings in symptomatic and asymptomatic contact 
lens wearers. Optom Vis Sci 1999;76:700–4
 199. Cedarstaff TH, Tomlinson A. A comparative study of tear evaporation rates and 
water content on soft contact lenses. Am J Optom Physiol Opt 1983;60:167-74
 200. Ladwig KH, Marten-Mittag B, Formanek B, Dammann G. Gender dif￾ferences of symptom reporting and medical health care utilization in the 
German population. Eur J Epidemiol 2000;16:511–8
 201. Tomlinson A, Pearce EI, Simmons PA, Blades K. Effect of oral contracep￾tives on tear physiology. Ophthal Physiol Opt 2001;21:9-6
 202. Glasson MJ, Keay L, Sweeney DF, et al. Tolerant and intolerant contact 
lens wearers show differences in clinical parameters and tear film volume. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:5116-24
 203. Glasson MJ, Stapleton F, Willcox MD. Lipid, lipase and lipocalin differ￾ences between tolerant and intolerant contact lens wearers. Curr Eye Res
2002;25:227-35
 204. Timberlake GT, Doane MG, Bertera GH. Short term, low contrast visual 
acuity reduction associated with in vivo contact lens dry eye. Optom Vis 
Sci 1992;69:755-60
 205. Lohmann CT, Fitzke F, O’Brart D, et al. Corneal light scattering and visual 
performance in myopic individuals with spectacles, contact lens or excel￾sior laser filter refractive keratectomy. Am J Ophthalmol 1993;115:444-53
 206. Thibos LN, Cheng X, Bradley A. Design principles and limitations of wave￾front guided contact lenses. Eye Contact Lens 2003;29(1 Suppl):S167-70
 207. Thai LC, Tomlinson A, Ridder WH. Contact lens drying and visual perfor￾mance: the vision cycle for contact lenses. Optom Vis Sci 2002;79: 81-8
 208. Abelson MB, Smith L, Chapin M. Ocular allergic disease: Mechanisms, 
disease subtypes, treatment. Ocul Surf 2003;1:127-49
 209. Ralph RA. Conjunctival goblet cell density in normal subjects and in dry 
eye syndromes. Invest Ophthalmol 1975;14:299-302
 210. Kunert KS, Keane-Myers AM, Spurr-Michaud S, et al. Alteration in goblet 
cell numbers and mucin gene expression in a mouse model of allergic 
conjunctivitis. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2001;42:2483-9
 211. Fujishima H, Toda I, Shimazaki J, Tsubota K. Allergic conjunctivitis and 
dry eye. Br J Ophthalmol 1996;80:994-7
212. Baudouin C. [The vicious circle in dry eye syndrome: a mechanistic ap￾proach.] J Fr Ophtalmol 2007;30:239-46 
 213. Bron AJ, Tiffany JM, Yokoi N, Gouveia SM. Using osmolarity to diagnose 
dry eye: a compartmental hypothesis and review of our assumptions. Adv 
Exp Med Biol 2002;506(PtB):1087-95
 214. Baudouin C. The pathology of dry eye. Surv Ophthalmol 2001;45 Suppl 
2:S211-20
 215. Niederkorn JY, Stern ME, Pflugfelder SC, et al. Dessicating stress induces 
T-cell mediated Sjogren’s syndrome-like lacrimal keratoconjunctivitis 
sicca. J Immunol 2006;176:3950-7
 216. Yeh S, Song XJ, Farley W, et al. Apoptosis of ocular surface cells in experi￾mentally induced dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:124-9
 217. Kunert KS, Tisdale AS, Gipson IK. Goblet cell numbers and epithelial 
proliferation in the conjunctiva of patients with dry eye syndrome treated 
with cyclosporine. Arch Ophthalmol 2002;120:330-7
 218. Brignole F, Pisella PJ, Goldchild M, et al. Flow cytometric analysis of 
inflammatory markers in conjunctival epithelial cells of patients with dry 
eyes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:1356-63
 219. Zhao H, Jumblatt JE, Wood TO, Jumblatt MM. Quantification of MUC￾S5AC protein in human tears. Cornea 2001;20:873-7
 220. Argueso P, Balaram M, Spurr-Michaud S, et al. Decreased levels of the 
goblet cell mucin MUC5AC in tears of Sjogren’s syndrome patients. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002;43:1004-1011
 221. Shimazaki J, Sakata M, Tsubota K. Ocular surface changes and discom￾fort in patients with meibomian gland dysfunction. Arch Ophthalmol 
1995;113:1266-70
 222. Tsubota K. Tear dynamics and dry eye. Prog Retin Eye Res 1998;17:565-96
 223. Qian L, Xie J, Rose CM, et al. Altered traffic to the lysozyme in an ex vivo 
lacrimal acinar cell model for chronic muscarinic receptor stimulation. 
Exp Ey Res 2004;79:665-75
 224. Tang NE, Zuure PL, Pardo RD, et al. Reflex lacrimation in patients with 
glaucoma and healthy control subjects by fluorophotometry. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 2000;41:709-14
 225. Xu KP, Yagi Y, Tsubota K. Decrease in corneal sensitivity and change in 
tear function in dry eye. Cornea 1995;15:235-9 
 226. Bourcier. Decreased corneal sensitivity in patients with dry eye. Invest 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2005;46:2341-5
 227. Benitez-Del-Castillo JM, Acosta MC, Wassfi MA, et al. Relation between 
corneal innervation with confocal microscopy and corneal sensitivity with 
noncontact esthesiometry in patients with dry eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci 2007;48:173-81
 228. Goto E, Endo K, Suzuki A, et al. Tear evaporation dynamics in normal 
subjects and subjects with obstructive meibomian gland dysfunction. 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:533-9
 229. Craig JP, Tomlinson A. Importance of the lipid layer in human tear film 
stability and evaporation. Optom Vis Sci 1997;74:8-13
 230. Ousler GW, Emory TB, Welch D, Abelson MB. Factors that influence 
the inter-blink interval (IBI) as measured by the ocular protection index 
(OPI). Poster presentation, ARVO, 2002
231. Sommer A: Nutritional blindness. Xerophthalmia and keratomalacia. 
Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1982
232. Sommer A, Green WR. Goblet cell response to vitamin A treatment for 
corneal xerophthalmia. Am J Ophthalmol 1982;94:213-5
 233. Rolando M, Brezzo G, Giordano P, et al, in Van Bijsterweld OP, Lemp MA, Spi￾nelli D (eds). The effect of different benzalkonium chloride concentrations 
on human normal ocular surface. A controlled prospective impression cytol￾ogy study. The lacrimal system. Amsterdam, Kugler & Ghedini, 1991:89-91
 234. Becquet F, Goldschild M, Moldovan MS, et al. Histopathological effects of 
topical ophthalmic preservatives on rat corneoconjunctival surface. Curr 
Eye Res 1998;17:419-25
 235. De Saint Jean M, Brignole F, Bringuier AF, et al. Effects of benzalkonium 
chloride on growth and survival of Chang conjunctival cells. Invest Oph￾thalmol Vis Sci 1999;40:619-30
 236. Ishibashi T, Yokoi N, Kinoshita S. Comparison of the short-term effects 
on the human corneal surface of topical timolol maleate with and without 
benzalkonium chloride. J Glaucoma 2003;12:486-90
 237. Pisella PJ, Debbasch C, Hamard P, et al. Conjunctival proinflammatory and 
proapoptotic effects of latanoprost and preserved and unpreserved timolol: 
an ex vivo and in vitro study. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45:1360-8
 238. De Saint Jean M, Debbasch C, Brignole F, et al. Toxicity of preserved and 
unpreserved antiglaucoma topical drugs in an in vitro model of conjunc￾tival cells. Curr Eye Res 2000;20:85-94
 239. Baudouin C, Pisella PJ, Fillacier K, et al. Ocular surface inflammatory 
changes induced by topical antiglaucoma drugs: human and animal 
studies. Ophthalmology 1999;106:556-3
 240. Knop E, Brewitt H. Conjunctival cytology in asymptomatic wearers of 
soft contact lenses. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1992;230:340-7
 241. Knop E, Brewitt H. Induction of conjunctival epithelial alterations by 
contact lens wearing. A prospective study. Ger J Ophthalmol 1992;1:125-34
 242. Connor CG, Campbell JB, Steel SA, Burke JH. The effects of daily wear 
contact lenses on goblet cell density. J Am Optom Assoc 1994;65:792-4
 243. Lievens CW, Connor CG, Murphy H. Comparing goblet cell densities in pa￾tients wearing disposable hydrogel contact lenses versus silicone hydrogel 
contact lenses in an extended-wear modality. Eye Contact Lens 2003;29:241-4
 244. Aragona P, Ferreri G, Micali A, Puzzolo D . Morphological changes of the 
conjunctival epithelium in contact lens wearers evaluated by impression 
cytometry. Eye 1998;12:461-6
 245. Pisella PJ, Malet F, Lejeune S, et al. Ocular surface changes induced by 
contact lens wear. Cornea 2001;20:820-5
 246. Afonso A, Monroy D, Stern M, et al. Correlation of tear fluorescein clear￾ance and Schirmer test scores with ocular irritation symptoms. Ophthal￾mology 1999;106:803-10
 247. Belmonte C, Tervo T. Pain in and around the eye, in McMahon S, Koltzen￾burg M (eds). Wall and Melzack’s Textbook of Pain, 5th Edition. London, 
Elsevier Science, 2005
 248. Belmonte C, Acosta MC, Gallar J. Neural basis of sensation in intact and 
injured corneas. Exp Eye Res 2004;78:513-25
DEWS DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION
