The Cellular Mechanisms of
Dry Eye: From Pathogenesis to
Treatment
FLAVIO MANTELLI,1
* MINA MASSARO-GIORDANO,2 ILARIA MACCHI,3
ALESSANDRO LAMBIASE,3 AND STEFANO BONINI3
1
IRCCS Fondazione GB Bietti of Rome, Rome, Italy
2
Department of Ophthalmology, Scheie Eye Insitute University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
3
Department of Ophthalmology, Campus Bio-Medico University of Rome, Rome, Italy
Dry eye is a complex disease characterized by changes in the ocular surface epithelia related to reduced quality and/or quantity of tears,
inflammatory reaction, and impairment of ocular surface sensitivity. It has recently been proposed that increased tear osmolarity
represents a main trigger to the altered cellular mechanisms leading to epithelial damage in dry eye. However, dry eye pathogenesis is
multifactorial, with cytotoxic inflammatory mediators, altered lacrimal gland secretion and nerve function, squamous metaplasia of the
conjunctival epithelium and decrease of goblet cells density, all playing a role in a detrimental loop that perpetuates and worsens damage to
the corneal and conjunctival epithelia. Current topical treatments for dry eye patients include the use of lubricants and anti-inflammatory
drugs. However, lubricants only improve symptoms temporarily, and chronic use of topical steroids is associated to severe ocular side
effects such as cataract and glaucoma. The deeper understanding of the cellular mechanisms that are altered in dry eye is opening novel
perspectives for patients and physicians, who are seeking treatments capable not only of improving symptoms but also of restoring
the homeostasis of the ocular surface. In this review, we will focus on novel anti-inflammatory agents and on nerve growth factor, a
neurotrophin that is altered in dry eye and has been suggested as a main player in the neuroimmune cross-talk of the ocular surface as well
as in the stimulation of corneal sensitivity, epithelial proliferation and differentiation, and stimulation of mucin production by goblet cells.
J. Cell. Physiol. 228: 2253–2256, 2013.  2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
The Lacrimal functional unit (LFU) is an integrated system
comprising the lacrimal glands, ocular surface (cornea,
conjunctiva, and meibomian glands) and lids, and the sensory
and motor nerves that connect them. Disease or damage to
any of these components can destabilize the tear film and lead
to ocular surface disease that expresses itself as dry eye. As a
consequence, dry eye is among the most common diseases to
encounter for an ophthalmologist, as it is estimated to affect
between 5% and more than 30% of the worldwide population
at various ages, with very high socio-economic costs and
substantial burden for the health system (Dry Eye Workshop,
2007).
The main characteristic of dry eye is an altered tear film,
which can be compromised either by decreased tear secretion
or altered tear composition. Ocular surface inflammation is a
secondary consequence that triggers a detrimental loop
leading to epithelial damage. In this loop, reflex tear secretion
in response to ocular inflammation is envisioned as the initial
compensatory mechanism, but, with time, inflammation
accompanying chronic secretory dysfunction worsens and a
decrease in corneal sensation enters the picture, eventually
compromising the reflex response and resulting in even greater
tear film impairment (Stevenson et al., 2012). Therefore,
perturbation of the LFU caused by any reason (local, systemic,
or environmental) is considered to play an important role in
triggering the disease and in the evolution to different forms of
dry eye, which are generally classified as autoimmune and non￾autoimmune aqueous-deficient, and evaporative. These dif￾ferent forms of dry eye may result from a wide-spectrum of
systemic and ocular diseases, including Sjo¨gren’s syndrome,
Rheumatoid Artritis, Lupus Eritematosus Systemicus, Stevens
Johnson’s syndrome, thyroid disease, Bell’s palsy, meibomian
gland disease, blepharitis, ocular rosacea, refractive surgery,
blepharoplasty, lagophthalmos, entropion/ectropion, cranial
surgeries, side effects of drugs (antihistamines, diuretics, beta￾blockers), ocular injuries and burns, chemotherapy and
radiation, aging, menopause, and more. Therefore, it is now
accepted that dry eye is by all means a multifactorial disease
characterized by common clinical manifestations as described
in detail below (Dry Eye Workshop, 2007).
Pathogenesis
A number of common mechanisms can be identified in the
multifactorial pathogenesis of dry eye: (i) chronic inflammation
of the conjunctiva, (ii) decreased ocular surface sensitivity; (iii)
tear film impairment, including decreased tear production and
stability; (iv) epithelial damage, associated with squamous
metaplasia and decrease of conjunctival goblet cells density.
Chronic inflammation of the conjunctiva
The ocular surface inflammatory reaction of dry eye is not
limited to the autoimmune form, which is characterized by
immune cells’ infiltration of the lacrimal glands and conjunctiva.
In fact, the core mechanisms of all dry eye types are driven by
tear hyperosmolarity and tear film instability (Dry Eye
Workshop, 2007). Tear hyperosmolarity causes damage to the
*Correspondence to: Flavio Mantelli, IRCCS GB Bietti, Via Livenza,
3, 00198 Rome, Italy. E-mail: f.mantelli@unicampus.it
Manuscript Received 9 March 2013
Manuscript Accepted 2 May 2013
Accepted manuscript online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com): 21 May 2013.
DOI: 10.1002/jcp.24398
MINI REVIEW 2253
Journal of Journal of
Cellular
Physiology
Cellular
Physiology

2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.
surface epithelium by activating a cascade of inflammatory
events at the ocular surface and a release of inflammatory
mediators into tears. Among them, elevated levels of
inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, IL-8,
and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) play a prominent
role, especially in autoimmune dry eye. This inflammatory
component contributes to the dry eye symptoms and the
disease process itself (Moore et al., 2011). In line with this, it
has been widely proven that the signs and symptoms of dry eye
improve with anti-inflammatory agents such as corticosteroid
and cyclosporin A (Pflugfelder et al., 2008), accompained by a
reduction in local IL levels.
Decreased ocular surface sensitivity
The ocular surface is extensively supplied by sensory and
autonomic nerve fibers that play a crucial role in maintaining
healthy epithelia and are altered by chronic inflammation in
dry eye (Kulka et al., 2008), leading to a decrease in corneal
sensitivity and a consequent neurosecretory block that
reduces reflex tear secretion (Lambiase et al., 2011). Another
important mechanism behind the detrimental loop triggered by
nerve fiber alterations in dry eyes is the so-called “neurogenic
inflammation” (Beuerman and Stern, 2005; Mantelli
et al., 2010). To understand its importance in dry eye it must be
underlined that lacrimal gland function undergoes nervous
system regulation (Micera et al., 2008), with autonomic and
sensory nerves locally releasing neuropeptides that regulate
acinar gland secretion and inflammatory reactions (Chung
et al., 1996). The main factors of this neurogenic inflammation
are two sensory neuropeptides that are increased in tear fluid
of dry eye patients: substance P (SP) and calcitonine gene￾related peptide (CGRP). SP, released from sensitive nerves and
inflammatory cells during inflammatory processes, participates
in lacrimal gland and ocular surface inflammation by acting on
epithelial and immune cells, including mast cells, macrophages,
and T cells, leading to the release of cytokines and chemokines
(Mosimann et al., 1993). CGRP, released from activated
trigeminal sensory nerves and immune cells, plays a role in
inflammatory responses by dilating blood vessels and stimu￾lating leukocyte extravasation (Springer et al., 2003). More
recently, the involvement of automomic neuropetides in the
neurogenic inflammation of the ocular surface has also been
shown. Specifically, the anti-inflammatory role of neuropeptide
Y (NPY), released by sympathetic nerves, has been demon￾strated (Dartt et al., 1996). NPY was shown to modulate
potent immunological effects in vitro and in vivo (such as
increasing adhesion, migration and phagocitic capacity of
macrophages), to decrease NK cells activity, to inhibit T cells
proliferation, and to shift cytokines production from a Th1 to a
Th2 pattern (Kova`cs et al., 2005). Decreased circulating levels
of NPY have been reported in autoimmune diseases, and
reduction in NPY-containing nerve terminals was observed in
salivary glands of patients with Sjo¨ gren’s syndrome (Tuisku
et al., 2008), suggesting that it could also be reduced in lacrimal
glands of dry eye patients.
Tear film impairment
Decreased tear production. Traditionally, the
pathogenesis of dry eye has been ascribed to decreased tear
production. The neurosecretory block of reflex tear
production has been described above and other mechanisms
include inflammatory cell infiltration of the lacrimal gland and
reduced conjunctival goblet cell number (Dry Eye Workshop,
2007). However, it is now known that a reduction in tear film
quality (including reduced stability and increased osmolarity)
is equally important for the disease’s pathogenesis (Uchino
et al., 2012).
Decreased tear stability. The tear film is the most
dynamic structure of the LFU, and its production and turnover
is essential to maintaining ocular surface homeostasis.
Classically, the tear film is reported to be composed of three
layers: the mucous, aqueous, and lipid layers (Mantelli
et al., 2007). There are no actual boundaries between such
layers and a dysfunction of any of them can result in dry eye.
However, in this review, we will focus only on the mucous layer
(Mantelli and Argeso, 2008) which is composed of secretory,
gel-forming (MUC5AC, secreted by goblet cells) and trans￾membrane (MUC1, 4, 16) ocular surface mucins (Blalock
et al., 2007) heavily glycosylated glycoproteins that interact to
prevent adhesion of foreign debris, inflammatory cells or
pathogens to the ocular surface, and to stabilize the tear film
(Andrianifahanana et al., 2006). Mucins are also essential to
maintaining proper epithelial protection by forming an
epithelial barrier through the interaction with carbohydrate￾binding proteins called galectins (galactose binding lectins) that
are highly expressed by the conjunctival epithelium (Argu¨eso
et al., 2009; Mantelli et al., 2009). Early studies on dry eye
patients found alterations in the glycosylation of gel-forming
ocular surface mucins in dry eye that may be responsible for the
loss of hydrophilicity and reduced lubrication. Further reports
have confirmed an MUC5AC alteration in different dry eye
types (McKenzie et al., 2000) and decreased levels of MUC19,
another recently discovered gel-forming mucin, have also been
described in conjunctival epithelium of patients with Sjo¨gren’s
dry eye (Yu et al., 2008).
More recent studies have shown that transmembrane
mucins are also altered in dry eye. Specifically, an MUC1
reduction was shown to impair tear film stability and an
O-acetyl sialic acid component of MUC16 was also shown to
be altered on the apical cell surface of non-Sjo¨gren’s dry eye
patients, suggesting that an alteration of mucin O-glycosylation
in dry eye compromises the ocular surface epithelial barrier
making it more susceptible to epithelial damage (Sumiyoshi
et al., 2008).
Lastly, as mentioned before, one of the main features of dry
eye syndrome is an increased tear film osmolarity. Recent
studies in yeast on mucin-like proteins Hkr1 and Msb2
(Tatebayashi et al., 2007) have shown that transmembrane
mucins could also display features of osmosensors triggering
signaling cascades. This possibility has yet to be confirmed in
mammalian epithelia, however, it is possible to speculate that
cell surface-associated mucins could function as osmosensors
to induce signaling responses, and their alteration in dry eye
could cause a reduced protection against hyperosmolar tears.
Epithelial damage
Epithelial cells at the ocular surface are continuously faced with
the critical challenge of forming a protective apical barrier that
prevents cellular damage and adhesion during blinking or
sleeping, while allowing the exchange of molecules with the
extracellular milieu (Sumiyoshi et al., 2008). Loss of such
barrier function is ascribed to numerous mucosal pathologies,
including dry eye.
A recent paper by Argu¨eso et al. (2009) has provided direct
evidence of the role of mucins in maintaining mucosal integrity
through a carbohydrate-dependent interaction with a
molecule known as galectin-3 on apical membranes, forming an
epithelial barrier lined on top of the ocular surface epithelia.
Both mucins and galectin-3 are among the most highly
expressed molecules at the ocular surface, making the
epithelial barrier a major component of the ocular surface
(Mantelli et al., 2009). The aforementioned alterations in mucin
expression and/or carbohydrate composition may result in a
breach of this protective barrier, putting the dry eye patients at
higher risk of epithelial damage, which leads to ocular surface
JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY
2254 MANTELLI ET AL.
inflammation and, in turn, triggers a detrimental loop that
worsens signs and symptoms. However, epithelial barrier
alterations are not the sole actors of the cellular changes
observed in patients with dry eye, which lead to conjunctival
and corneal epithelial metaplasia. In fact, progression into dry
eye disease is commonly characterized by increased prolifer￾ation in the conjunctival epithelium, decrease in goblet cell
number, and in severe cases, keratinization due to abnormal
differentiation of the epithelia. Several mechanisms have been
advocated to induce squamous metaplasia of the conjunctival
epithelium in dry eye, including: desiccation with goblet cell
loss, inflammation with release of cytokines such as IL-1 and
interferon-gamma from activated T cells in the conjunctival
epithelium. Moreover, a recent study by Mantelli et al. (2009)
has shown a downregulation of the Notch signaling pathway in
the conjunctival epithelium of dry eye patients. The authors
suggested that downregulation of Notch —known to be
involved in cell fate determination and differentiation in
mucosal surfaces—could compromise the integrity of the
ocular surface and move its wet-surfaced phenotype towards
the dry, keratinized phenotype typical of advanced dry eye
disease. In line with this, histological examination of the mouse
cornea after inducible ablation of Notch1 showed extensive
hyperplasia and keratinization of the epithelium.
Treatment
Due to its multifactorial nature and to its different forms,
treatment of dry eye requires multiple approaches, including
environmental preventive measures, tear substitutes, and
pharmacological therapy. While tear substitutes are by far the
most frequent approach to temporarily relieve symptoms,
pharmacologic therapy remains the most useful in the long￾term and for controlling the acute phases (Dry Eye Workshop,
2007). Specifically, since inflammation plays a prominent role in
dry eye pathogenesis, anti-inflammatory and
immunosuppressive drugs are universally considered the
pharmacologic agents of choice for controlling the
inflammatory cascade of this disease. Nevertheless, chronic
corticosteroid treatment is well known to carry serious ocular
side effects (including glaucoma and cataract), and other
immunosuppressive drugs, such as cyclosporine-A (CsA) eye
drops, have been developed to overcome the obstacle of not
being able to provide patients with a safer alternative
(Lemp, 2008).
On the other hand, inflammation is not the sole mechanism
responsible for the pathophysiologic triggers of dry eye. In fact,
as discussed above, another important mechanism behind the
dry eyes is an altered ocular surface sensitivity leading to a
neurosecretory block. Specifically, the chronic surface damage
of dry eyes leads to a fall in corneal sensitivity and a reduction
of reflex tear secretion. Growing experimental and clinical
evidence suggests that nerve growth factor (NGF) eye drops
may become a novel treatment for dry eye, potentially capable
to restore ocular surface homeostasis through a restoration of
sensitivity and reflex tear secretion (Lambiase et al., 2011;
Table 1).
Cyclosporine-A
CsA is a fungal antimetabolite used as an anti-inflammatory
drug due to its capability to inhibit IL-2 activation of
lymphocytes. In addition, CsA inhibits apoptosis by blocking
the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore
(MPTP) (Matsuda and Koyasu, 2000) and by increasing the
density of conjuctival goblet cells (Kunert et al., 2002). It is
mainly used systemically to prevent rejection of various
solid-tissue transplants. From the 1980s, several reports
highlighted that topical CsA can be used to treat a variety of
ocular inflammatory conditions including dry eye, high-risk
corneal transplants, autoimmune uveitis, and vernal kerato￾conjunctivitis (Lemp, 2008). Recent studies have shown that
topical CsA does not only control ocular surface inflammation,
but it is also effective in increasing tear secretion and tear film
stability (through an increase in goblet cell density), in restoring
epithelial damage, and in reducing disease recurrences over
the long term (Utine et al., 2010).
Nevertheless, CsA has been approved only by US Food and
Drug Administration, and only for use in moderate-to-severe
dry eye.
Nerve growth factor
NGF and its receptors TrkA and p75 are highly expressed by
the ocular surface and may play a role in several ocular surface
diseases, including dry eye (Lambiase
TABLE 1. Pathogenic mechanisms of dry eye and treatment targets
Pathogenic trigger Cellular mechanisms Treatment agents and mechanisms
The inflammatory
cascade
Increased levels of IL-1, IL-6, IL-8 Cyclosporine A: inhibits IL-2 activation of lymphocytes
Increased levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) NGF: modulates inflammatory reactions by inhibiting the release of
cytokines and chemokines and blood vessels dilation, preventing
leukocyte extravasation
Decreased corneal sensitivity; reduction of reflex tear
secretion
Reduced ocular
surface sensitivity
Neurosecretory block NGF: increases ocular surface sensitivity by promoting regeneration of
sensory and autonomic nerve fibers
Neurogenic inflammation
(i) Increased levels of substance P (SP) and calcitonine
gene-related peptide (CGRP)
(ii) Decreased levels of neuropeptide Y (NPY)
Altered tear secretion
(quality and quantity)
Neurosecretory block of reflex tear production Tear substitutes
Decreased levels of MUC19 MUC5AC, MUC1, MUC16 Cyclosporine A: increases conjunctival goblet cell density and acqueous
tear secretion
NGF: regulates tear film production by lacrimal gland; modulates
conjunctival epithelial differentiation into goblet cells (releasing
MUC5AC in the tear film)
Epithelial damage Lack of Galectin-3 in the apical epithelial barrier Cyclosporine A: inhibits epithelial cell apoptosis (blocks the
mitochondrial permeability transition pore)
Squamous metaplasia of the conjunctival epithelium, with
goblet cell loss
NGF: promotes ocular surface healing by stimulating corneal and
conjunctival epithelial proliferation and differentiation; protects
epithelia from hyperosmolar tear damage
Downregulation of the Notch signaling pathway Galectin-3 or Notch substitutes (?)
JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY
CELLULAR MECHANISMS OF DRY EYE 2255
et al., 1998a, b, 2009a, b, 2012; Lee et al., 2005). In fact, NGF
increases ocular surface sensitivity, inhibits inflammatory
reactions, and regulates tear film production by lacrimal gland
and goblet cells. (Lee et al., 2005) It is, therefore, possible that
NGF may be used a novel therapeutic option in dry eye disease.
In line with this hypothesis: (i) NGF eye drop treatment
increased tear production and conjunctival goblet cell density
in a dog experimental model of dry eye (Coassin et al., 2005);
(ii) increased tear concentration of NGF has been suggested as
a compensatory mechanism in patients affected by dry eye
(Lambiase et al., 2011); and (iii) NGF has recently been
shown to regulate conjunctival epithelial differentiation into
MUC5AC-secreting goblet cells (Lambiase et al., 2009a, b).
Moreover, Chang et al. (2008) have recently demonstrated an
up-regulation of NGF in corneal epithelial cells under hyper￾osmolar stress. The authors suggest that NGF may contribute
to reduce the apoptosis of corneal epithelial cells triggered
by hyperosmolarity and that, therefore, exogenous NGF
administration may be beneficial in recovering corneal damage
due to chronic hyperosmolarity.
Conclusions
Over the past decade many physiological mechanisms altered
in dry eye disease have emerged. Among them, in this review,
we discussed a number of common mechanisms including
chronic inflammation, impaired nerve function, altered tear
production, and corneal and conjunctival epithelial damage
with squamous metaplasia, epithelial barrier disruption and
decrease in goblet cells density.
However, while a better understanding of ocular surface
physiology and of the cellular mechanisms that are altered in
dry eye led to an improved comprehension of the complex and
multifactorial pathogenesis of the disease, novel therapeutic
options proven to be safe and effective such as CsA are facing
more difficulties to be widely accepted, and topical steroids
remain a treatment mainstay in spite of their long-term side
effects. On the other hand, emerging drugs such as NGF eye
drops may soon be coming to the market as an alternative
option for dry eye patients.
The understanding of which specific cellular responses
are involved in the different forms of dry eye could also result in
the development of other treatment strategies for a better
management and lasting results. In fact, a better knowledge of
the pathogenesis of the different types of dry eye would
improve the treatment choice through to the development
of compounds targeting specific components such as the
epithelial barrier, corneal nerves, conjunctival goblet cells, or
immune cells and cytokines involved in the ocular inflammatory
reaction.
Literature Cited
Andrianifahanana M, Moniaux N, Batra SK. 2006. Regulation of mucin expression:
Mechanistic aspects and implications for cancer and inflammatory diseases. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1765:189–222.
Argu¨eso P, Guzman-Aranguez A, Mantelli F, Cao Z, Ricciuto J, Panjwani N. 2009. Association
of cell surface mucins with galectin-3 contributes to the ocular surface epithelial barrier. J
Biol Chem 284:23037–23045.
Beuerman RW, Stern ME. 2005. Neurogenic inflammation: A first line of defense for the
ocular surface. Ocul Surf 3:S203–S206.
Blalock TD, Spurr-Michaud SJ, Tisdale AS, Heimer SR, Gilmore MS, Ramesh V, Gipson IK.
2007. Functions of MUC16 in corneal epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 48:4509–
4518.
Chang EJ, Im YS, Kay EP, Kim JY, Lee JE, Lee HK. 2008. The role of nerve growth factor in
hyperosmolar stress induced apoptosis. J Cell Physiol 216:69–77.
Chung CW, Tigges M, Stone RA. 1996. Peptidergic innervation of the primate meibomian
gland. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 37:238–245.
Coassin M, Lambiase A, Costa N, De Gregorio A, Sgrulletta R, Sacchetti M, Aloe L, Bonini S.
2005. Efficacy of topical nerve growth factor treatment in dogs affected by dry eye.
Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 243:151–155.
Dartt DA, Kessler TL, Chung E-H, Zieske JD. 1996. Vasoactive intestinal peptide stimulated
glycoconjugate secretion from conjunctival goblet cells. Exp Eye Res 63:27–34.
Dry Eye Workshop. 2007a. The definition and classification of dry eye disease: Report of the
Definition and Classification Subcommittee of the International Dry Eye Workshop. Ocul
Surf 5:75–92.
Dry Eye Workshop. 2007b. Methodologies to diagnose and monitor dry eye disease: Report
of the Diagnostic Methodology Subcommittee of the International Dry Eye Workshop.
Ocul Surf 5:108–152.
Dry Eye Workshop. 2007c. Management and therapy of dry eye disease: Report of the
Management and Therapy Subcommittee of the International Dry Eye Workshop. Ocul
Surf 5:163–178.
Kova´cs I, Luda´ny A, Koszegi T, Fehe´r J, Kova´cs B, Szolcsa´nyi J, Pinte´r E. 2005. Substance P
released from sensory nerve endings influences tear secretion and goblet cell function in
the rat. Neuropeptides 39:395–402.
Kulka M, Sheen CH, Tancowny BP, Grammer LC, Schleimer RP. 2008. Neuropeptides
activate human mast cell degranulation and chemokine production. Immunology 123:
398–410.
Kunert KS, Tisdale AS, Gipson IK. 2002. Goblet cell numbers and epithelial proliferation in
the conjunctiva of patients with dry eye syndrome treated with cyclosporine. Arch
Ophthalmol 120:330–337.
Lambiase A, Bonini S, Micera A, Rama P, Bonini S, Aloe L. 1998a. Expression of nerve growth
factor receptors on the ocular surface in healthy subjects and during manifestation of
inflammatory diseases. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 39:1272–1275.
Lambiase A, Rama P, Bonini S, Caprioglio G, Aloe L. 1998b. Topical treatment with nerve
growth factor for corneal neurotrophic ulcers. N Engl J Med 338:1174–1180.
Lambiase A, Aloe L, Centofanti M, Parisi V, Mantelli F, Colafrancesco V, Manni GL, Bucci MG,
Bonini S, Levi-Montalcini R. 2009a. Experimental and clinical evidence of neuroprotection
by nerve growth factor eye drops: Implications for glaucoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
106:13469–13474.
Lambiase A, Micera A, Pellegrini G, Merlo D, Rama P, De Luca M, Bonini S, Bonini S. 2009b. In
vitro evidence of nerve growth factor effects on human conjunctival epithelial cell
differentiation and mucin gene expression. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 50:4622–4630.
Lambiase A, Mantelli F, Sacchetti M, Rossi S, Aloe L, Bonini S. 2011. Clinical applications of
NGF in ocular diseases. Arch Ital Biol 149:283–292.
Lambiase A, Aloe L, Mantelli F, Sacchetti M, Perrella E, Bianchi P, Rocco ML, Bonini S. 2012.
Capsaicin-induced corneal sensory denervation and healing impairment are reversed by
NGF treatment. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 53:8280–8287.
Lee HK, Lee KS, Kim HC, Lee SH, Kim EK. 2005. Nerve growth factor concentration and
implications in photorefractive keratectomy vs laser in situ keratomileusis. Am J Ophthal
139:965–971.
Lemp MA. 2008. Management of dry eye disease. Am J Manag Care 14:S88–S101.
Mantelli F, Argu¨eso P. 2008. Functions of ocular surface mucins in health and disease.
Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 8:477–483.
Mantelli F, Tiberi E, Micera A, Lambiase A, Visintini F, Bonini S. 2007. MUC5AC
overexpression in tear film of neonates. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 245:
1377–1381.
Mantelli F, Schaffer L, Dana R, Head SR, Argu¨eso P. 2009. Glycogene expression in
conjunctiva of patients with dry eye: Downregulation of Notch signaling. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 50:2666–2672.
Mantelli F, Micera A, Sacchetti M, Bonini S. 2010. Neurogenic inflammation of the ocular
surface. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 10:498–504.
Matsuda S, Koyasu S. 2000. Mechanisms of action of cyclosporine. Immunopharmacology
47:119–125.
McKenzie RW, Jumblatt JE, Jumblatt MM. 2000. Quantification of MUC2 and MUC5AC
transcripts in human conjunctiva. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 41:703–708.
Micera A, Lambiase A, Bonini S. 2008. The role of neuromediators in ocular allergy. Curr
Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 8:466–471.
Moore JE, Vasey GT, Dartt DA, McGilligan VE, Atkinson SD, Grills C, Lamey PJ, Leccisotti A,
Frazer DG, Moore TC. 2011. Effect of tear hyperosmolarity and signs of clinical ocular
surface pathology upon conjunctival goblet cell function in the human ocular surface.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 52:6174–6180.
Mosimann BL, White MV, Hohman RJ, Goldrich MS, Kaulbach HC, Kaliner MA. 1993.
Substance P, calcitonin generelated peptide, and vasoactive intestinal peptide increase in
nasal secretions after allergen challenge in atopic patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 92:95–104.
Pflugfelder SC, De Paiva CS, Villarreal AL, Stern ME. 2008. Effects of sequential artificial tear
and cyclosporine emulsion therapy on conjunctival goblet cell density and transforming
growth factor-beta2 production. Cornea 27:64–69.
Springer J, Geppetti P, Fischer A, Groneberg DA. 2003. Calcitonin gene-related peptide as
inflammatory mediator. Pulm Pharmacol Ther 16:121–130.
Stevenson W, Chauhan SK, Dana R. 2012. Dry eye disease: An immune-mediated ocular
surface disorder. Arch Ophthalmol 130:90–100.
Sumiyoshi M, Ricciuto J, Tisdale A, Gipson IK, Mantelli F, Argu¨eso P. 2008. Antiadhesive
character of mucin O-glycans at the apical surface of corneal epithelial cells. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 49:197–203.
Tatebayashi K, Tanaka K, Yang HY, Yamamoto K, Matsushita Y, Tomida T, Imai M, Saito H.
2007. Transmembrane mucins Hkr1 and Msb2 are putative osmosensors in the SHO1
branch of yeast HOG pathway. EMBO J 26:3521–3533.
Tuisku IS, Konttinen YT, Konttinen LM, Tervo TM. 2008. Alterations in corneal sensitivity
and nerve morphology in patients with primary Sjo¨gren’s syndrome. Exp Eye Res 86:
879–885.
Uchino Y, Kawakita T, Miyazawa M, Ishii T, Onouchi H, Yasuda K, Ogawa Y, Shimmura S, Ishii
N, Tsubota K. 2012. Oxidative stress induced inflammation initiates functional decline of
tear production. PLoS ONE 7:e45805.
Utine CA, Stern M, Akpek EK. 2010. Clinical review: Topical ophthalmic use of cyclosporin
A. Ocul Immunol Inflamm 18:352–361.
Yu DF, Chen Y, Han JM, Zhang H, Chen XP, ZouWJ, Liang LY, Xu CC, Liu ZG. 2008. MUC19
expression in human ocular surface and lacrimal gland and its alteration in Sjogren
syndrome patients. Exp Eye Res 86:403–411.
JOURNAL OF CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY
2256 MANTELLI ET AL.
