Ophthalmic Technology Assessment
Thermal Pulsation in the Management of
Meibomian Gland Dysfunction and Dry Eye
A Report by the American Academy of Ophthalmology
Jeremiah P. Tao, MD,1 Joanne F. Shen, MD,2 Vinay K. Aakalu, MD, MPH,3 Jill A. Foster, MD, FACS,4
Suzanne K. Freitag, MD,5 Timothy J. McCulley, MD,6 M. Reza Vagefi, MD,7 Stephen J. Kim, MD,8
Edward J. Wladis, MD9
Purpose: To review the literature to determine the efficacy and safety of thermal pulsation technologies in
improving signs or symptoms of meibomian gland dysfunction (MGD) and dry eye compared with no therapy or
with conventional warm compress therapy or eyelid hygiene.
Methods: A literature search was conducted in the PubMed database in June 2022 and again in March 2023
to identify all studies in the English language on the use of thermal pulsation to treat MGD or dry eye. The search
yielded 59 citations, and 11 articles met all of the inclusion criteria. The panel methodologist then assigned a level
of evidence rating for each study; 8 studies were rated level I evidence and 3 studies were rated level II evidence.
Results: All included studies evaluated a single 12-minute session using the LipiFlow automated thermal pul￾sation system (TearScience, Inc, or Johnson & Johnson). Improvements were detected in subjective and objective
metrics of MGD or dry eye in patients within 1 to 12 months of thermal pulsation treatment compared with
nontreatment. Most of the studies (9/11) reported greater efficacy with thermal pulsation than with standard warm
compress therapy and eyelid hygiene. Four of these studies showed relevant industry conflicts of interest. Two of the
4 level I studies without direct industry participation concluded that thermal pulsation treatment was not significantly
different from conventional hygiene or warm compress therapy control treatments (in symptoms in one of the studies
and in objective findings in the second study). No serious adverse events were reported in any of the 11 studies.
Conclusions: According to the current literature, a single thermal pulsation session may improve subjective
or objective parameters of MGD and dry eye safely. However, industry support and participation were present in 4
of the 8 level I studies. The durability beyond several months and cost efficacy remain uncertain. Because the
inclusion parameters of this assessment captured only the LipiFlow system, the conclusions are limited to that
product. High-quality independent studies are needed to assess the long-term benefits of this intervention.
Financial Disclosure(s): The author(s) have no proprietary or commercial interest in any materials discussed
in this article. Ophthalmology 2023;130:1336-1341 ª 2023 by the American Academy of Ophthalmology
The American Academy of Ophthalmology prepares
Ophthalmic Technology Assessments to evaluate new and
existing procedures, drugs, and diagnostic and screening
tests. The goal of an Ophthalmic Technology Assessment is
to review the available research for clinical efficacy and
safety. After review by members of the Ophthalmic Tech￾nology Assessment Committee, other Academy committees,
relevant subspecialty societies, and legal counsel, assess￾ments are submitted to the Academy’s Board of Trustees for
consideration as official Academy statements. The purpose
of this assessment by the Ophthalmic Technology Assess￾ment Committee Oculoplastics and Orbit Panel is to review
the published literature on the efficacy and safety of thermal
pulsation in the treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction
(MGD) and dry eye.
Background
Meibomian gland dysfunction is a chronic, diffuse ab￾normality of the meibomian glands, commonly attributed
to terminal duct obstruction, qualitative or quantitative
changes in the glandular secretion, or a combination
thereof. This abnormality is thought to result in symptoms
of eye irritation, clinically apparent inflammation, alter￾ation of the tear film, and ocular surface disease. It is
currently considered the most prevalent cause of dry
eye.1,2 Dry eye affects millions worldwide and is
associated with considerable health care costs and
productivity losses.3,4
Current therapeutic options for MGD such as regular
hygiene or applying heat have limited efficacy and can be
1336 ª 2023 by the American Academy of Ophthalmology
Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2023.07.009
ISSN 0161-6420/23
burdensome or even painful.5,6 Thermal pulsation using an
automated or partially automated thermodynamic treatment
device (e.g., LipiFlow system [TearScience, Inc, or Johnson
& Johnson], TearCare [Sight Sciences, Inc], MiBoFlo
Thermoflo [Mibo Medical], and Systane iLux thermal
pulsation system [Alcon]) was described first by Korb and
Blackie7 and is an increasingly popular treatment for MGD.
In brief, these in-office systems apply heat and pressure to
the eyelids for several minutes while the patient is under
topical anesthesia. A single unilateral thermal pulsation ses￾sion may cost patients approximately $300 to $1000 (United
States dollars) out of pocket, and repeat treatment is common
because MGD is a chronic, lifelong disease.8
Question for Assessment
This assessment addressed the following question: What is
the efficacy and safety of thermal pulsation in improving
signs or symptoms or both of MGD and dry eye compared
with no therapy or conventional (nonthermal pulsation)
therapy such as warm compress or eyelid hygiene?
Description of Evidence
A literature search was conducted in the PubMed database in
June 2022 and again in March 2023 using the following terms:
Lipiflow, MiBoFlo, Thermoflo, iLux, thermal pulsation[tw],
vectored thermal pulsation[tw], meibomian gland disease
[tw], eyelid thermal pulsation system[tw], therma[tiab], and
pulsation[tiab]. The articles were reviewed to select those that
met the following inclusion criteria: (1) the study represented
prospective research in the English language; (2) the study
included at least 15 participants undergoing thermal pulsation
controlled against no therapy or conventional (nonthermal
pulsation) therapy such as warm compress, eyelid hygiene, or
both; (3) standardized measures of dry eye or ocular surface
disease were used; and (4) the study included a minimum of 1
month of follow-up. The search yielded 59 citations, of which
11 articles met all of the inclusion criteria. The panel’s
methodologist (V.K.A.) assessed and rated the quality of the
methodologies in each study according to the American
Academy of Ophthalmology’s guidelines that are adapted
from the 2011 Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine.9
A level I rating is assigned to well-designed and well￾conducted randomized controlled trials and systematic re￾views. A level II rating is assigned to well-designed cohort
studies and nonrandomized controlled cohort or follow-up
trials. A level III rating is assigned to case series or to
lower-quality case-controlled or cohort studies.
Published Results
Eight articles were rated level I evidence and 3 articles were
rated level II evidence. A summary of the 11 included
studies is provided in Table 1.
Level I Study Outcomes
In a prospective, open-label, randomized, crossover, multi￾center clinical trial that involved 139 participants, Lane et al10
compared the results for thermal pulsation (69 participants)
with those for warm compresses (70 participants; control
group) for adults with MGD. A single thermal pulsation
session resulted in significant improvement in meibomian
gland secretion (assessed using a proprietary handheld
instrument), and tear film breakup time (TBUT) compared
with the control group at 2 and 4 weeks (P < 0.05). Dry
eye symptoms assessed using both the Standard Patient
Evaluation of Eye Dryness (SPEED) and Ocular Surface
Disease Index (OSDI) improved with thermal pulsation,
but not in control participants. The authors concluded that
thermal pulsation resulted in a significantly greater
reduction in MGD and dry eye signs and symptoms than
warm compresses. No serious adverse event was reported.
This study was funded by TearScience. In addition, 2
authors are employees of TearScience, and another author
is a paid consultant of the company.
Finis et al11 compared the efficacy of a single thermal
pulsation (17 participants) with combined eyelid warming
and massage (14 participants; control group) in patients
with MGD in a prospective, randomized, crossover,
observer-masked clinical trial. They reported that a single
thermal pulsation is at least as effective as 3 months of twice
daily eyelid-margin hygiene and warming in terms of OSDI
scores (P < 0.01). Objective measures, including the change
in the number of expressible meibomian glands, lipid layer
thickness (LLT), and TBUT, were similar with those of the
control group. No serious adverse event was reported. The
thermal pulsation system was provided by the company
TearScience, but the authors reported no other relevant con-
flicts of interest.
In a randomized, controlled trial, Blackie et al12 evaluated
the 1-year effects of thermal pulsation in improving MGD and
dry eye symptoms. They reported that a single thermal pul￾sation (99 participants) delivered a sustained mean improve￾ment in meibomian gland function and mean improvement on
OSDI over 12 months compared with warm compress therapy
and eyelid hygiene (98 participants; control group; P <
0.001). No serious adverse event was reported. This study was
funded by TearScience. In addition, 2 authors are employees
of TearScience (C.A.B. and C.A.C.), and the senior author
(E.J.H.) serves on its medical advisory board.
In another randomized, controlled trial, Blackie et al13
evaluated a single thermal pulsation treatment (29
participants) compared no treatment (25 participants;
control group) in contact lens wearers. The thermal
pulsation treatment group showed significantly greater
mean change from baseline in meibomian gland secretion
(P < 0.0001) and SPEED (P < 0.0001) at 3 months; that
group also showed significantly greater improvement in
TBUT and eyelid wiper epitheliopathy as well as greater
frequency of over-the-counter drop use compared with the
control group. At 1 month, mean comfortable contact lens￾wearing time increased by 4.0  3.9 hours, and this was
sustained for 3 months with no change in the control group.
No serious adverse event was reported. This study was funded
by TearScience, and 2 authors are employees of the company.
Kasetsuwan et al,14 in a prospective, randomized trial,
evaluated the efficacy of thermal pulsation (26
participants) compared with standard eyelid hygiene alone
Tao et al  Ophthalmic Technology Assessment
1337
Ophthalmology Volume 130, Number 12, December 2023
1338 Table 1. Summary of Included Studies
Authors,
Year
Level of
Evidence Patient Population
No. of Included
Patients/Eyelids in
Treatment Group
No. of Thermal Pulsation
Treatments (Specific
System)
Longest
Follow-up
(Months)
Control/Comparison, If
Any (Patients/Eyelids) Outcome/Findings
Lane et al
(2012)10
I American patients with
MGD
69/69 1 (LipiFlow) 1 Warm compress (70/70) Significant improvement in MG secretion and TBUT,
SPEED, and OSDI with thermal pulsation over
control (P < 0.05).
Finis et al
(2014)11
I German patients with
MGD
17/17 1 (LipiFlow) 3 Eyelid warming and
massage (14/14)
Thermal pulsation is as least as effective as a 3-month,
twice-daily lid margin hygiene regimen for MGD in
improving OSDI (P < 0.01). No significant difference
was noted between the 2 groups in objective metrics
such as number of expressible MG, LLT, or TBUT.
Blackie et al
(2016)12
I American patients with
MGD and dry eyes
99/99 1 (LipiFlow) 12 Warm compress and lid
hygiene not reported (98/
98)
Significantly greater mean improvement in MG
function and OSDI of thermal pulsation compared
with control (P < 0.001).
Zhao et al
(2016)18
II Asian patients with MGD
and dry eyes
25/25 1 (LipiFlow) 3 Pretreatment as well as
compared with warm
compress (25/25)
Thermal pulsation improved irritation, TBUT, Schirmer
test results, and gland secretion compared with
baseline (P <0.01), but similar to 3 months of twice￾daily warm compresses (P ¼ 0.88).
Zhao et al
(2016)19
II Chinese patients with
MGD
29/29 1 (LipiFlow) 3 Pretreatment as well as
untreated contralateral
side (29/29)
Significant reduction in SPEED and OSDI accompanied
by an increase of invasive TBUT and MGYLS and a
reduction in corneal staining with thermal pulsation
compared with the baseline parameters or
contralateral untreated side (P < 0.05).
Blackie et al
(2018)13
I American and Canadian
contact lens wearers
with MGD and dry eyes
29/29 1 (LipiFlow) 3 No treatment 25/25 Thermal pulsation significantly greater mean change
from baseline in MG score (P < 0.0001) and SPEED
(P < 0.001) and significantly greater improvement in
TBUT (P ¼ 0.005), lid wiper epitheliopathy (P ¼
0.04), and frequency of artificial tear use (P ¼ 0.02).
Kasetsuwan
et al
(2020)14
I Thai patients with MGD
and glaucoma
26/26 1 (LipiFlow) 6 Eyelid warming, massage,
and hygiene alone
(22/22)
Thermal pulsation similarly improved MG assessment
score, OSDI, Schirmer test results, TBUT, LLT, and
meibography as standard lid hygiene (P > 0.05).
Li et al
(2020)20
II Chinese patients with
MGD and dry eyes
25/25 obstructive
MGD
1 (LipiFlow) 3 Hyposecretory MGD
(25/25)
SPEED, OSDI, and partial blink rate decreased.
Meanwhile, TBUT, tear meniscus height, Schirmer,
LLT increased compared with baseline in both groups
after thermal pulsation treatment. Effect more
profound in obstructive MGD patients (P <0.0001).
Park et al
(2021)16
I Korean cataract patients
with or without MGD
60/60 1 (LipiFlow) 3 No intervention (48/48) Thermal pulsation significantly improved MG patency
and meibum quality, increased TBUT time, reduced
corneal staining, and improved OSDI and Dry Eye
Questionnaire (P < 0.05).
Zhao et al
(2021)15 I Elderly Chinese cataract surgery patients with
MGD
16/16 1 (LipiFlow) 3 Patients with MGD not
undergoing cataract
surgery (16/16)
Subjective symptoms were not alleviated. A single
thermal pulsation before cataract surgery was effective
in improving MGYLS compared with control (P <
0.001) and preventing the decline of TBUT after
cataract surgery.
Mencucci
et al
(2022)17
I Italian cataract surgery
patients with MGD
23/23 1 (LipiFlow) 2 Warm compress and
eyelid massage (23/23)
Thermal pulsation improved TBUT, SPEED, MGYLS,
MG secretion score, meibum quality, and confocal
microscopy of MG (P < 0.05).
LLT ¼ lipid layer thickness; MG ¼ meibomian gland; MGD ¼ meibomian gland dysfunction; MGYLS ¼ meibomian glands yielding liquid secretion; OSDI ¼ Ocular Surface Disease Index;
SPEED ¼ Standard Patient Evaluation of Eye Dryness; TBUT ¼ tear film breakup time.
(22 participants; control group) in patients with MGD using
long-term antiglaucoma medications. At 6 months, thermal
pulsation treatment combined with standard eyelid hygiene
was not significantly different from eyelid hygiene alone in
the meibomian gland expression score, OSDI score,
Schirmer test score, TBUT, corneal staining score, LLT, or
meibography score (P > 0.05). Of note, both groups
exhibited significant improvement from baseline in meibo￾mian gland expression score, OSDI score, LLT, and mei￾bography score. No serious adverse event was reported, and
no relevant conflict of interest was disclosed.
In a prospective trial, Zhao et al15 investigated the efficacy
of preoperative thermal pulsation in 32 elderly Chinese
patients with cataract and MGD. The authors report that
subjective symptoms did not improve; however, a single
application of thermal pulsation before cataract surgery
objectively alleviated blockage of meibomian glands and
prevented the decline of TBUT after cataract surgery.
Meibomian glands yielding liquid secretion improved with
thermal pulsation compared with contralateral untreated eye
controls (P < 0.001). No serious adverse event was
reported. No relevant conflict of interest was disclosed.
Park et al,16 in a randomized clinical trial, investigated
the effects of a single thermal pulsation (48 participants)
versus no treatment (60 participants; control group) before
cataract surgery on MGD and dry eye induced by surgery.
They concluded that in this population of patients
undergoing cataract surgery with or without MGD
preoperative thermal pulsation improved meibomian gland
patency and meibum quality, increased TBUT, reduced
corneal staining, and improved subjective outcomes
reported on both the OSDI and Dry Eye Questionnaire (P
< 0.05). No serious adverse event was reported, and no
relevant conflict of interest was disclosed.
In a randomized clinical trial, Mencucci et al17
investigated the effects of a single thermal pulsation (23
participants) versus warm compresses and eyelid massage
(23 participants; control group) before cataract surgery on
MGD and dry eye induced by surgery. They concluded
that in this population of patients with MGD undergoing
cataract surgery, preoperative thermal pulsation improved
dry eye disease in terms of TBUT, SPEED score,
meibomian glands yielding liquid secretion, meibomian
gland yielding secretion score, meibum quality, and the
confocal microscopy of the meibomian glands (P < 0.05).
No relevant conflict of interest was disclosed.
Level II Study Outcomes
In a nonrandomized trial, Zhao et al18 evaluated the efficacy
and safety of thermal pulsation in 29 Asian patients with
different grades of meibomian gland loss. A single session
of thermal pulsation improved irritation, TBUT, Schirmer
without anesthetics, and gland secretion variables
compared with pretreatment (P < 0.01). This effect was
similar to 3 months of twice-daily warm compresses
(P ¼ 0.88). No serious adverse event was reported. No
relevant conflict of interest was disclosed.
In a prospective trial, Zhao et al19 investigated the safety
and efficacy of a single thermal pulsation in 25 elderly
Chinese patients with MGD. They report a significant
reduction in dry eye symptoms (SPEED and OSDI
questionnaires) accompanied by an increase of invasive
TBUT and meibomian glands yielding liquid secretion and
a reduction in corneal staining compared with the baseline
parameters as well as with the contralateral, untreated eye
(control group; P < 0.05). No serious adverse event was
reported. No relevant conflict of interest was disclosed,
although TearScience supplied the applicators used in this
study.
In a nonrandomized clinical trial, Li et al20 compared
hyposecretory MGD with obstructive MGD with respect
to patient response to a single thermal pulsation (25
participants in each group). They evaluated SPEED,
OSDI, Schirmer without anesthetics test, noninvasive
keratographic breakup time, tear meniscus height, LLT,
partial blink rate, meibomian gland loss, and meibomian
gland morphologic features with LipiView (TearScience,
Inc). The authors also evaluated meibomian gland
expressibility and secretion quality in these patients. The
authors reported that SPEED, OSDI, and partial blink rate
decreased, whereas noninvasive keratographic breakup
time, tear meniscus height, Schirmer I, and LLT increased
compared with baseline in both groups after thermal
pulsation (P < 0.001), but the effect was more profound
in hyposecretory MGD (P < 0.001). No serious adverse
event was reported. No relevant conflict of interest was
disclosed.
Conclusions
This review of the English-language literature reveals that
a single application of thermal pulsation was safe and
usually demonstrated a benefit at least comparable with
standard daily warm compress therapy and eyelid hygiene
in patients with MGD and dry eye. Patients from pre￾dominately White or Asian populations experienced both
subjective benefits (as measured by validated question￾naires) and objective improvement in the health of the
eyelids and ocular surface compared with nontreatment
for several months after a single thermal pulsation ses￾sion. Four of the included studies were sponsored and
directly supported by relevant industry and raise concern
over potential conflict. The 3 level I studies without direct
industry participation concluded that thermal pulsation
treatment was not significantly different from eyelid hy￾giene control treatment. Thermal pulsation seems to be
safe and may add to the therapeutic armamentarium for
MGD and dry eye, and it may fill a void if regimented
eyelid hygiene and warm compress therapy are not
possible or not desirable.
Future Research
The durability of thermal pulsation beyond several
months and cost efficacy remain uncertain. Independent,
unbiased studies of different thermal pulsation treatment
frequencies and controlled studies of other thermal
pulsation platforms in diverse populations are warranted.
Tao et al  Ophthalmic Technology Assessment
1339
This assessment captured only studies of LipiFlow in
predominately White or Asian patients. Finally, attention
to the presenting characteristics of those patients for
whom this technology is ineffective may expand the
understanding of the role of thermal pulsation in dry
eye management.
Footnotes and Disclosures
Originally received: May 16, 2023.
Accepted: July 12, 2023.
Available online: August 27, 2023.Manuscript no. OPHTHA-D-23-00847.
1 Gavin Herbert Eye Institute, University of California, Irvine School of
Medicine, Irvine, California.
2 Mayo Clinic Arizona, Scottsdale, Arizona.
3 Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences University of Mich￾igan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
4 Ophthalmic Surgeons and Consultants of Ohio, Columbus, Ohio.
5 Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts.
6 Department of Ophthalmology, John P. McGovern Medical School,
University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas.
7 Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
8 Department of Ophthalmology, Vanderbilt University School of Medi￾cine, Nashville, Tennessee.
9 Ophthalmic Plastic Surgery, Lions Eye Institute, Department of Ophthal￾mology, Albany Medical Center, Albany (Slingerlands), New York.
Disclosure(s):
All authors have completed and submitted the ICMJE disclosures form.
The author(s) have made the following disclosure(s):
V.K.A.: Financial support e National Eye Institute, Department of Defense,
Veterans Affairs; Board of Trustees e University of Illinois; Equity owner
e ViSo Therapeutics Inc., 8th Line III
S.K.F.: Consultant e Horizon, Sling, Biridian, Immunovant, Medtronic,
ASPEN/Third Rock, Poriferous, WL Gore; Royalties e Springer, Thieme;
Data safety and monitoring committee e Idiopathic intracranial hyperten￾sion study
E.J.W.: Consultant e Johnson & Johnson Vision
Funded without commercial support by the American Academy of
Ophthalmology.
Prepared by the Ophthalmic Technology Assessment Committee Oculo￾plastics and Orbit Panel and approved by the American Academy of
Ophthalmology’s Board of Trustees April 21, 2023.
HUMAN SUBJECTS: No human subjects were included in this study. All
of the cited research had appropriate humans subjects research approval
from the respective institutions. The requirement for informed consent was
waived because of the retrospective nature of the study. All research
adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki.
No animal subjects were used in this study.
Author Contributions:
Conception and design: Tao, Shen, Wladis
Analysis and interpretation: Tao, Shen, Wladis, Aakalu
Data collection: Tao, Shen, Aakalu, Foster, Freitag, McCulley, Vagefi,
Kim, Wladis
Obtained funding: N/A; Study was performed as part of the authors’ regular
employment duties. No additional funding was provided.
Overall responsibility: Tao
Abbreviations and Acronyms:
LLT ¼ lipid layer thickness; MGD ¼ meibomian gland dysfunction;
OSDI ¼ Ocular Surface Disease Index; SPEED ¼ Standard Patient
Evaluation of Eye Dryness; TBUT ¼ tear film breakup time.
Correspondence:
Andre Ambrus, MLIS, American Academy of Ophthalmology, Quality and
Data Science, P. O. Box 7424, San Francisco, CA 94120-7424. E-mail:
aambrus@aao.org.
Key words:
MiBoFlo, Thermoflo, iLux, thermal pulsation, Lipiflow
Correspondence:
Andre Ambrus, MLIS, American Academy of Ophthalmology, Quality and
Data Science, P. O. Box 7424, San Francisco, CA 94120-7424. E-mail:
aambrus@aao.org.
References
1. Lemp MA, Crews LA, Bron AJ, et al. Distribution of
aqueous-deficient and evaporative dry eye in a clinic-based
patient cohort: a retrospective study. Cornea. 2012;31:
472e478.
2. Geerling G, Tauber J, Baudouin C, et al. The International
Workshop on Meibomian Gland Dysfunction: report of the
Subcommittee on Management and Treatment of Meibomian
Gland Dysfunction. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011;52:
2050e2064.
3. Pflugfelder SC. Prevalence, burden, and pharmacoeconomics
of dry eye disease. Am J Manag Care. 2008;14:S102eS106.
4. Clegg JP, Guest JF, Lehman A, Smith AF. The annual cost
of dry eye syndrome in France, Germany, Italy, Spain,
Sweden and the United Kingdom among patients managed
by ophthalmologists. Ophthalmic Epidemiol. 2006;13:
263e274.
5. Blackie CA, Korb DR. Meibomian for gland expression:
forces of expression, types of secretion and the limitation of
resulting pain. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010;51:3385.
6. Freedman HL, Preston KL. Heat retention in varieties of warm
compresses: a comparison between warm soaks, hard-boiled
eggs and the re-heater. Ophthalmic Surg. 1989;20:846e848.
7. Korb DR, Blackie CA. Restoration of meibomian gland
functionality with novel thermodynamic treatment device-a
case report. Cornea. 2010;29:930e933.
8. Beining MW, Magno MS, Moschowits E, et al. In-office
thermal systems for the treatment of dry eye disease. Surv
Ophthalmol. 2022;67:1405e1418.
9. Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine. Levels of evi￾dence (March 2011). Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine:
University of Oxford; v. 2020. Available at: https://www.
cebm.ox.ac.uk/resources/levels-of-evidence/ocebm-levels-of￾evidence; Accessed August 2, 2023.
10. Lane SS, DuBiner HB, Epstein RJ, et al. A new system, the
LipiFlow , for the treatment of meibomian gland dysfunction.
Cornea. 2012;31:396e404.
11. Finis D, Hayajneh J, Konig C, et al. Evaluation of an auto￾mated thermodynamic treatment (LipiFlow ) system for
Ophthalmology Volume 130, Number 12, December 2023
1340
meibomian gland dysfunction: a prospective, randomized,
observer-masked trial. Ocul Surf. 2014;12:146e154.
12. Blackie CA, Coleman CA, Holland EJ. The sustained effect
(12 months) of a single-dose vectored thermal pulsation pro￾cedure for meibomian gland dysfunction and evaporative dry
eye. Clin Ophthalmol. 2016;10:1385e1396.
13. Blackie CA, Coleman CA, Nichols KK, et al. A single
vectored thermal pulsation treatment for meibomian gland
dysfunction increases mean comfortable contact lens wearing
time by approximately 4 hours per day. Clin Ophthalmol.
2018;12:169e183.
14. Kasetsuwan N, Suwajanakorn D, Tantipat C, Reinprayoon U.
The efficacy between conventional lid hygiene and additional
thermal pulsatile system in meibomian gland dysfunction pa￾tients treated with long-term anti-glaucoma medications in a
randomized controlled trial. Clin Ophthalmol. 2020;14:
2891e2902.
15. Zhao Y, Li J, Xue K, et al. Preoperative management of MGD
with vectored thermal pulsation before cataract surgery: a
prospective, controlled clinical trial. Semin Ophthalmol.
2021;36:2e8.
16. Park J, Yoo YS, Shin K, et al. Effects of lipiflow treatment
prior to cataract surgery: a prospective, randomized, controlled
study. Am J Ophthalmol. 2021;230:264e275.
17. Mencucci R, Mercuri S, Cennamo M, et al. Efficacy of
vector thermal pulsation treatment in reducing post-cataract
surgery dry eye disease in patients affected by meibomian
gland dysfunction. J Cataract Refract Surg. 2023;49(4):
423e429.
18. Zhao Y, Veerappan A, Yeo S, et al. Clinical trial of thermal
pulsation (LipiFlow ) in meibomian gland dysfunction with
preteatment meibography. Eye Contact Lens. 2016;42:
339e346.
19. Zhao Y, Xie J, Li J, et al. Evaluation of monocular treatment
for meibomian gland dysfunction with an automated thermo￾dynamic system in elderly Chinese patients: a contralateral eye
study. J Ophthalmol. 2016;2016:9640643. https://doi.org/10.
1155/2016/9640643. Epub 2016 Dec 27.
20. Li B, Fu H, Liu T, Xu M. Comparison of the therapeutic effect
of meibomian thermal pulsation LipiFlow on obstructive and
hyposecretory meibomian gland dysfunction patients. Int
Ophthalmol. 2020;40:3469e3479.
Pictures & Perspectives
Successfully Treated Giant Conjunctival Papilloma
An 18-year-old man presented with enlarging masses in his right eye for months. Anterior segment examination revealed multiple
pedunculated lesions extending the lower palpebral conjunctiva without corneal involvement (A). The fellow eye was uninvolved. We
performed excisional biopsy combined with cryotherapy and injected interferon a-2a (IFN-a 2a) in subconjunctival space during the
operation. The histopathological examination revealed papillary, well-differentiated, acanthotic nonkeratinized squamous epithelial cells
with fibrovascular cores, which was compatible with conjunctival papilloma (B). After excision (C), we kept topical IFN-a 2a 4 times daily
for 2 months. Three years later, no recurrence developed (D). (Magnified version of Figure A-D is available online at www.aaojournal.org).
CHIUNG JU HSU, MD1
CHEN CHANG, MD2
YI HSUN HUANG, MD, PHD1
1
Department of Ophthalmology; 2
Department of Pathology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan
Tao et al  Ophthalmic Technology Assessment
1341
